Alham Usman, Esq. Director,
Commercial Lease Assistance Program
Community & Economic Development
BROOKLYN LEGAL SERVICES CORP. A
ausman@bka.org
718-487-1311




I head the Commercial Lease Assistance Program (CLA) which is funded by NYC SBS. My team is
the first, and often times only, contact point for NYC small business owners. CLA provides small
business owners with high-quality attorneys to help them with their commercial lease related
cases. To-date we have worked with over 1,400 small businesses and landlords in all five
boroughs. In the last month two months alone of this fiscal year my team has represented over
small business owners in 164 cases. We have worked with 104 different business owners and
their landlords throughout in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, Staten Island and Long
Island.

We have assisted our clients with negotiating their arrears, new leases, renewing their leases,
and terminating their leases and negotiating the myriad of details that go into ensuring fair
contracts. Recently, I personally negotiated a reduction of almost $90,000 in rental arrears for
a minority-womyn owned small business so that she could terminate her lease and close the
business. While this is a great result to ensure that our small business owners can survive as
human beings, it speaks to the inability of them to survive as small business owners because
they simply cannot afford the commercial rents.

The challenges faced by NYC small business owners have been placed under a magnifying glass
with the Covid-19 pandemic. One of these glaring, enlarged, unavoidables is the issue of
commercial rent. It is one that my team confronts every day with every business owner we
speak with. It is de facto the single most consequential barrier in allowing small businesses to
exist, succeed and/or survive. Unless we want NYC to become like the vacant towns in America
with ghosts of the mom n’ pops shops of the past, or the merry-go-round of repeated large
chain shops, the uniqueness that is NYC, the diversity of its small businesses and ability to find
anything and everything here, all of these things that have made this the capital of the world,
will be lost. Commercial rent stabilization is the survival of the NYC economy.
