Bonnie Slotnick Cookbooks
28 E Second St., New York, NY 10003
212-989-8962
bslotnickbooks@gmail.com

September 17, 2021


To the New York City Council Small Business Committee:

My name is Bonnie Slotnick, and I am the owner of a 25-year-old business, Bonnie Slotnick
Cookbooks, on East Second Street. Believe it or not, I don’t sell my books online, yet I’m still in
business. I would like to testify in support of Intros. 1796 and 2299.
    In 2014 my previous landlord, HM Village Realty, refused to renew my lease at 163 West
Tenth St., where I’d been a commercial tenant since 1999. I’d never been given more than a 3-
year lease, and every third year I’d be choked with panic wondering if he would offer a renewal.
    The first year my shop was on Tenth St. I was billed $800 total for property tax. In fiscal
year 2014-15 the total property tax bill was $13,107.15. The rent increases were modest by
comparison, but the monthly tax payments more than made up for that.
    When my lease came up for renewal in 2014, I braced myself for another rent increase.
Instead, I got a letter stating that the owner would not discuss a lease renewal. He didn’t
answer my phone calls or letters, and when I ran into him on the street, he jumped into his car
and slammed the door shut.
    When, without much hope, I began my search for a new space, I looked at tiny, overpriced
storefronts in the East Village, some of them long vacant; some of them are still empty six years
later. I was warned to avoid certain landlords because of their predatory ways.
    My story, miraculously, has a happy ending, because Margo and Garth Johnston, who were
born and raised in a house on East 2nd St. and now own it, reached out to me and asked me to
be their tenant. These bookstore lovers, children of a literary family, gave me a 10-year lease
(on a space three times the size of my previous shop) at an affordable rent, and they treat me
like a member of their family. Unbelievably, at the start of the COVID lockdown Margo took
the rent check I handed her and said, “You know, I’m not going to deposit your checks until
this is over.” I realize that not every small business can enjoy such incredible good fortune, but
they should at least have a fair chance to stay in business.
    Please pass Intros. 1796 and 2299, and please continue to create legislation to help the city’s
small businesses survive and thrive. I’ve lost too many of my colleagues already, and for no
justifiable reason.


Sincerely,
Bonnie Slotnick
