                                  TESTIMONY

                       Small Business Committee Hearing:
“The Importance of Commercial Rent Stabilization for Cooperative Businesses and Small
                       Businesses in the Wellness Sector”

                                   Presented to
                New York City Council, Committee on Small Business
                              Hon. Mark Gjonaj, Chair
                            Friday September 17, 2021

                                   Prepared By:
                       Catherine Murcek, Worker-Owner
                  Samamkaya Yoga Back Care & Scoliosis Collective



                 Samamkaya Yoga Back Care & Scoliosis Collective
                         119 W 23rd Street, Ste. 406
                               646-964-5772
                       info@samamkayabackcare.com
                        www.samamkayabackcare.com
Thank you Chair Gjonaj and Honorable Council Members of the Committee on Small Business
for the opportunity to testify, and for changing the hearing to a virtual one to increase
accessibility. My name is Catherine Murcek and I am a worker owner at Samamkaya Yoga Back
Care & Scoliosis Collective and an elected member of the Advocacy Council coordinated by the
NYC Network of Worker Cooperatives (NYCNoWC), a partner organization of the Worker
Cooperative Business Development Initiative (WCBDI) and a member of the United for Small
Business NYC (USBnyc) coalition. The worker co-op community is so appreciative of your
continued support for co-ops through WCBDI and we are now urging you to support Intro
1796 for Commercial rent stabilization.

Our community of democratic worker-run businesses is small, but mighty, predominantly led by
women and people of color, representing communities across the five boroughs and a wide
array of industries from cleaning to catering, manufacturing, media, childcare, and more.
NYCNoWC is deeply committed to serving and lifting up the voices of its members for social and
economic justice, especially in historically marginalized communities, through programs like the
Advocacy Council, The Principle 6 Program, the Cooperative Sustainability Fund, and many
more. Through NYCNoWC’s Advocacy Council, of which I am honored to be a part, we are
elected by the full membership and are given the tools and support to be able to bring our
voices to policy spaces like these. After multiple years of research and collecting feedback we
have identified priority needs of our community and developed our own NYC Co-op Policy
platform (see www.workercoop.nyc), which many Council members have signed onto in support
of. Our municipal platform includes Intro 1796 because access to affordable commercial
space continues to be a major priority for our community year after year. The majority of
co-ops in NYC have never even been able to access a brick and mortar space because the
costs of rent are just too prohibitive. A fair and just system of commercial rent stabilization
would help to level the playing field, making much needed spaces more attainable not
just for co-ops, but for all small businesses in communities that have been historically
oppressed by a system that focuses on profit maximization over community wellbeing.

My business, Samamkaya Yoga, is a beautiful, little, unique studio in Chelsea focusing on the
therapeutic applications of yoga for people with a wide range of body types and ability levels,
including those with Scoliosis, herniated discs, spinal fusion, and more. We even have an
adaptive yoga class for folks with disabilities including but not limited to Multiples Sclerosis,
prosthetic limbs, and neurological disorders like Parkinson’s, Cerebral Palsy, etc. My 17 other
worker-owners and I have been democratically running the studio together in the same space
for the last 6.5 years, which we spent tens of thousands of dollars building out to our very
specific needs with yoga rope walls and every kind of prop you can imagine.

The pandemic naturally wrought havoc on our business as it did the rest of the wellness industry
in Chelsea and NYC’s entire small business community. Our profits plummeted when we had to
close our doors even though we were able to offer online classes. We were incredibly fortunate
to have received both rounds of PPP and small grants from the Cooperative Development
Foundation and the Cooperative Economics Alliance of NYC. However, demands to the city for
commercial rent relief did not bear fruits, and because we did not qualify for the Employee
Retention Grant and Small Business Continuity Loan program, there was very little city-level
support we could benefit from. The new lease we negotiated fortunately starts at a reduced rate,
but gradually increases to “market” rate over the course of ten years. Unfortunately, that makes
our future uncertain because our business has limited options for growing attendance because
our space is so small. Moving to a different space would almost surely put us out of business
because we haven’t been able to pay down the loan for our start-up costs to build out the space
we already have. Intro 1796 would protect our immense investment in our space and help
us plan for the future by limiting the amount our rent can go up to ensure we can stay in
our very unique space long term.

Other wellness spaces in our neighborhood were not as fortunate as we were. One well-loved
yoga studio I used to teach at in Flatiron, called Yoga Union, closed mid-pandemic after nearly
10 years of offering care, because they already knew at the end of their lease the landlord
planned to double their rent which was already around $14k / mo! These are the types of
tragedies commercial rent stabilization would prevent. The determinants of whether a small
business will succeed or fail rely in a huge part on the whims of how much their
commercial landlord wants to raise their rent at the end of the lease.

To anyone who says that regulating commercial rents is bad for the economy I have to ask, is it
good for the economy to close long-standing, well-loved businesses, causing workers to lose
their jobs, adding to the blight of vacant storefronts, and making it harder for communities to
build their own wealth, all in the name of maximizing profits for the few? Does it make sense
that businesses are being forced to close while vacant spaces are being hoarded across the
city, waiting for the highest bidder? Passing Intro 1796 would be a monumental shift toward
a just recovery, and is the right thing for the city to do right now to protect its small
business community. It’s true the bill is not yet perfect, but as a coalition member of USBnyc, I
have included our recommendations for improvement in the Appendix below. I am confident the
bill sponsor will listen to further feedback and make any amendments needed so that the bill can
best suit all parties involved in a compassionate, cooperative way, but we need to get it passed
first!

The pandemic is not over. High rents are by far the greatest obstacle our small business
community faces. Commercial tenants should not be expected to bear a greater burden than
their landlords, many of whom only care about maximizing profits and not about what that does
to destroy neighborhood culture and economy. Please pass Intro 1796 for commercial rent
stabilization for a just recovery that will help our city thrive long into the future. Thank you
for reading my testimony.
                                        APPENDIX A

         USBnyc Recommendations for How To Improve Intro 1796 to
             Get Strong Commercial Rent Stabilization in NYC

Covered Properties
   ● Rewrite definition of covered commercial spaces so that it focuses on uses permitted by
      Certificate of Occupancy or lease in a particular space, as opposed to what any
      particular tenant is engaged in at any given time
   ● Add entertainment venues and places of assembly to covered spaces
   ● Add all commercial spaces where grocery stores are permitted to covered spaces
   ● Clarify that leasing where written lease is for less than year, but tenancy survives after
      written lease expires, are covered

Appointees to the Rent Guidelines Board
  ● The chair should have expertise in community development or community organizing, in
      addition to finance and economics
  ● None of the public members should be commercial landlords
  ● Mayoral appointments (and removals) should be approved by city council
  ● Add a definition of “chain business” for purposes of limiting appointee representing
      tenant perspective

Initial Rents
    ● The initial rent for an occupied space should be the rent 60 days before the law
         becomes effective (otherwise landlords will raise rents in the interim).
    ● The initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law should be set based
         on the last lease for the space prior to the law going into effect.
    ● We would like to see a robust appeal process in place: tenants and owners should have
         60 days after the notice of registration to file for an adjustment of the rent, with an
         opportunity for the other party to respond.

Operations of the Guidelines Board
  ● Add definition of “affected area:” an area defined by the board each year for the purpose
      of setting a uniform rent adjustment policy for that year. Each affected area defined shall
      be no larger than the entire City of New York, and no smaller than a community district.
  ● Clarify that the administering agency will be a new agency established by the Mayor, the
      Commercial Rent Guidelines board.
  ● Clarity that the Mayor will need to designate another agency to oversee compliance with
      the guidelines set by the board.
  ● Require landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year.
      Rents should be frozen after any year where a registration is missing, false, or
      incomplete. The freeze should be lifted only when all missing registrations are filed and
      all false registrations are corrected.
●   The enforcement agency should send a complete rent history to the tenant every year.
    The history should include, if applicable, any overcharges, rent adjustments won through
    appeals or court cases, the effective date of any new and collectible rents, and any tax
    benefits or financing programs that apply to the building.
●   The board must establish, and landlords of all covered commercial spaces must use, a
    standard vacancy lease (this is also in the Storefront bill of rights bill).
