Charlotta Janssen, owner of Chez Oskar in Bed Stuy and member of the Bed Stuy
Restaurant Association.Restaurant tenants' number one problem are landlords. Every
Realtor boasts about us neighborhood restaurants when they sell real estate. Look up any
site and you will find mine. Those same realtors are fighting this desperately needed bill and
I would like for none of these realtors here to speak on our behalf.

1998 I opened Chez Oskar in Fort Greene. Crime was high and we were glad if we even had
10 customers. We had put everything into this business. With our neighbors we became
Fort Greene's restaurant row and felt a great sense of community, helping each other with
napkins, tablecloths, soda gas and more. Slowly all those pioneers that made Fort Greene
vibrant and multicultural have disappeared. None of the original businesses are still there -
each (including me) had a painful eviction.

My team is my family. Oskar's chef, Octavio Simanacas, is with me since 1999, my GM
Angelique Calmet Strakker since 2002. In 2012 I realized my landlord was ripping me off on
taxes and water bills. When confronted he said: "that's it, I'll never give you another lease" &
when my lease was up he evicted.



In Fort Greene I had nothing to show for 18 years of really good business, no equity at all.
My landlord sold my kitchen for scrap, collected key money and had a tenant paying more
than double what I did.



Most landlords do this, they destroy community for money, make running small bizzes,
family restaurants & dining out unaffordable.

We restaurants invest hundreds of thousands of dollars to open and when our leases are up
we can’t take it with us, nor do we have any way to continue in the communities we helped
build. Every realtor loves to boast of the diverse restaurants that make communities vibrant
& those are the first to evict us.

In Bed Stuy I am the only surviving business on my block because I now own. Many dreams
are shattered, now giant debts, while landlords have mortgages on pause and wait for the
next sucker to charge key money & double rent, oh and add on roadside, for which we, not
they, fought.

Businesses, that invest into a place as much as restaurants do, from sweat equity to solid
infrastructure, need rent stabilization like in France. There a commercial lease is a lease for
life, much like once a taxi medallion.
Let's clarify gentrification: there are communifiers and commodifiers:
Communifiers invest themselves and do their best to give services that improve life in their
communities.
Commodifiers calculate how little they have to give and how much they can pull out of their
community: keep empty storefronts, overcharge and bring in chain stores. The less they
give the more they will be rewarded.

We need laws that differentiate between the two. small businesses that work hard, invest
themselves into communities should not be thrown out to benefit commodifiers/landlords,
shattering small business dream.

Commercial Rent Stabilization works. That is why Paris isn’t a ghost town, but NYC is. Let‘s
make Paris in New York!

https://bmhavocats.com/en/2021/04/19/doing-business-in-france-what-you-need-to-know-
about-commercial-lease-agreements-under-french-law-2/



Chez Oskar Fort Green last party
Chez Oskar Fort Green goodbye letter
An empty Chez Oskar after 18 successful years
