Every Realtor boasts about us restaurants when they sell real estate in our neighborhoods.
Look up any site and you will find my place. Those same realtors are fighting this bill and
treating us like replaceables.

1998 I opened Chez Oskar in Fort Greene crime was high and we were glad if we had even
10 customers a day. We had put everything we had into this business with a 10 year lease.
Constant renovations and repairs did come at a cost and we grew. With our neighbors we
became Fort Greene's restaurant row and felt this great sense of community. We helped
each other out with bags, napkins, tablecloths, gas for soda and more. Slowly all the little
pioneers that made Fort Greene vibrant and multicultural have disappeared. None of the
original businesses are still there - each (including me) has a painful eviction story.

Box stores and high end restaurants dot the streets. I was able to renegotiate my lease once
when I still had 3 years left: charge me more and give me more years. My team is my family.
Oskar's chef, Octavio Simanacas,had been with me since 1999, my GM Angelique Calmet
Strakker since 2002. 2012 I realized my landlord was ripping me off on taxes and water
bills. When confronted he said: "that's it, I'll never give you another lease". Luckily I was able
to buy in Bed Stuy, but I still hurt from the loss of our corner.

In Fort Greene I had nothing to show for 18 years of really good business, no equity at all.
My landlord sold my kitchen for scrap, collected key money and had a tenant paying more
than double what I did. That is not equitable law and allows for many landlords to behave
badly, so they do. It makes affordable dining impossible too.

Small businesses invest hundreds of thousands of dollars to open and when their leases
are up there is no chance to take it with them nor do they have any rights to continue to
conduct business in the communities they built. Every realtor loves to boast of the diverse
family restaurants that make communities vibrant, so why are they fihgting this bill?

Your landlord can play god. In this system of zero checks and balances. A benevolent
landlord is just a sucker.The rotten ones win.

Here in Bed Stuy I am the only surviving business on my block because I own. Many dreams
are shattered, now giant debts, while landlords have their mortgages on pause and wait for.
the pandemic to blow over. This is not equitable.

Businesses that invest into a place as much as restaurants do from sweat equity to solid
infrastructure need rent stabilization. Look at the French model: a commercial lease is a
lease for life and should be, much like once a taxi medallion
Let's clarify gentrification: there are communifiers and commodifiers:
Communifiers invest themselves and do their best to give services that improve life in their
communities.
Commodifiers calculate how little they have to give and how much they can pull out of their
community: keep empty storefronts, overcharge and bring in chain stores. What do they
care? the less they give the more they will be rewarded.

We need laws that differentiate between the two. small businesses that work har, invest
themselves into communities should not be thrown out to benefit commodifiers/landlords.
Differentiate and protect those who make communities vibrant and stop rotten landlords
from shattering small business dreams.

Please follow the French model: that is why Paris is not a ghost town an NYC is.
