       Variations Theatre Group; DBA Chain Theatre Testimony:
                Commercial Rent Stabilization Hearing
                      Friday, September 17th 2021

Dear New York City Council Member Levin and Committee Counsel Stephanie Jones,

My name is Christina Perry and I am the Director of Development for the Chain Theatre,
a small theatre venue in midtown Manhattan. I am proud to say that since we reopened in
June we have had over 3000+ masked and fully vaccinated patrons attend our
programming with fully vaccinated artists. It's been an uplifting reopening, but a re-
opening with a long road ahead.

I’m writing in support of Intro 1796, the Commercial Rent Stabilization bill introduced
by Council member Levin. I’m a member of the independent theatre community. I am a
small theatre venue, our space was shuttered for over 15 months. Intro 1796 will help to
make sure that during this time of re-opening, they’ll be able to stay open. After such a
turbulent year, this legislation will provide stability for small businesses and indie
theaters. We need your help to keep our independent arts spaces alive.

Our company is no stranger to the vicious nature of New York City real estate. We built
and renovated our first space (when Hurricane Sandy hit) in Long Island City only to
have our landlord break our lease, reduce the theatre to rubble and put up luxury condos.
Now in our new space we find ourselves once again at the mercy of our landlords. An
uncomfortable but common place for small non-profits like the Chain. I don't have the
backing of lawyers and lobbyists so I come to you today to ask for your support on this
very important bill. We are at the mercy of our landlords now and throughout the
pandemic and now I seek your support during the worst housing crisis this city has seen
for commercial rent relief.

The Chain Theatre is home to thousands of artists and dozens of theatre companies. I've
joked with my colleagues that 'we are like an endangered species, we are, and we are
crucial to the cultural ecosystem that makes this city. Help us preserve our spaces. We are
one of the lucky few to still be open. Making affordable art spaces for artists that much
more difficult. Commercial rent stabilization would keep venues from having to rebuild
every time we are displaced. It will allow us to plan help us grow our futures based
around predictable rents. 60% of our income goes to rent alone. Imagine if that could go
into programming and more community events. Make it so it's not so easy for landlords
to remove local cultural institutions such as ours.

If ever there was a time, now is it. Please pass Intro 1796 now.

Sincerely,
Christina Perry
Director of Development
Chain Theatre 312 W. 36th Street 4th Floor New York, NY 10018
chaintheatre.org
