Hello - My name is Gabrielle Giattino, I am a small business owner on the lower east side and a
tenant in district 33.

I’m sorry I cannot attend the hearing on Friday. I am traveling out of the country on Thursday,
but I support the efforts of all of those fighting to pass commercial rent stabilization.

I own a small art gallery, and have for the past 11 years. I was very lucky during the Covid 19
lockdowns and slow downs. My clientele was able to keep supporting our business, and I could
keep my staff and artists paid and employed. I know many neighbors both near my gallery, and
my home who were not so lucky. Countless businesses closed, from Gaia Cafe on Houston to
Brooklyn Spectacle on N5 in Williamsburg. I have seen a list of more than 100 businesses just in
district 33 which closed in the past 18 months.

My 10-year lease is coming up for renewal in a year and because of issues due to leaking and
poor maintenance I will need to move. I know that the market rate for retail spaces such as my
own have at least doubled in the past 10 years. This, at a time when we see an incredible rate of
commercial vacancies across the city.

At this rate, the only businesses that will survive the commercial rental market is the big box
stores and chains. I’ve seen it happen in my neighborhood on Bedford Avenue in Williamsburg.
It’s banks and big chains. Small stores have survived by mutual aid and the kindness of citizens
who raise money for them on go-fund-me. It’s just wrong.

This is not what makes our city great. We are losing small businesses because of the stranglehold
that big real estate has on our city and our politicians. We need to protect small businesses and
make rent a predictable and sustainable expense, not a surprise, skyrocketing cost for business
tenants.

I urge you to support this bill, to protect the innumerable small businesses who continue to
struggle to make their businesses adjust to unreasonable rent increases.

Thank you,

Gabrielle Giattino


BUREAU
178 NORFOLK STREET
NEW YORK NY 10002
bureau-inc.com

Gabrielle Giattino
giattino@bureau-inc.com
+1 917 861 9300
