Testimony to City Council Committee on Small Business
Submitted to City Council Committee on Small Business on September 17, 2021
Prepared by Dance/NYC
Presented by: Gregory Youdan, Jr., Research & Advocacy Coordinator


On behalf of Dance/NYC (www.dance.nyc), a service organization that serves over 5,000
individual dance artists, 1,200 dance-making entities, and 500 non-profit dance companies
and the many for profit dance businesses based in the metropolitan New York City area,
including BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and Peoples of Color) dance workers, immigrants,
and disabled dance workers. Dance/NYC embeds the values of justice, equity, and inclusion
into all aspects of its operations and frames the following requests through the lens of those
values. Dance/NYC joins colleague advocates working across creative disciplines in
thanking you for your leadership during this time and requesting:


   1. The extension of commercial rent cancellation to help address the current and
       potential displacement of arts and cultural organizations and small businesses; and
   2. The establishment of a Commercial Rent Guidelines Board to set a maximum
       annual rent increase rate to help small businesses and independent arts and cultural
       spaces better plan and protect themselves from unpredictable rent raises and
       property tax assessments.


The recently extended eviction moratorium, relief programs, and small business recovery grants
are providing some support to the arts and culture sector as it continues to adapt to the new
realities of the ongoing pandemic. Dance/NYC expresses its gratitude to the City
Councilmembers, City Officials, Mayor’s Office and other dedicated workers who have
contributed to the recovery of the city’s arts and culture sector. We applaud the City Council for
passing legislation in support of protections and increased data collection for commercial
tenants. All this, however, will be for naught, if the issue of unchecked rent increases is not



                                                                                                     1
addressed. There are further considerations regarding commercial rent regulations in order for
arts and cultural organizations, particularly the hardest hit small budget organizations, to recover,
thrive, and be sustainable.


Since the start of the pandemic, Dance/NYC has been conducting the Coronavirus Dance Impact
Study (http://bit.ly/DNYCImpactSurvery), which is a comprehensive research study on the
impact COVID-19 is having on the dance sector. Dance/NYC’s Coronavirus Dance Impact
Survey found that dance organization, group, and project budgets shrunk by nearly one-third
(31% on average) due to earned and contributed revenue losses. 18% of dance organizations,
groups, and projects believe that permanent closure is likely or extremely likely; 84% of those
facing permanent closure have budgets under $100K. Separately, Dance/NYC has been tracking
organizational closures and is aware of at least 24 organizations and facilities that have
permanently closed their doors due to the pandemic; the majority of which includes studio
facilities which are primarily small businesses and beacons in their communities. In Dance/NYC
Defining “Small-Budget” Dance Makers in a Changing Dance Ecology
(www.dance.nyc/sbdmdata2020), we found that 83% of these organizations have existed in NYC
for over a decade and 43% have existed for more than 20 years. Infrastructural support and
regulations to prevent displacement and keep arts and culture organizations in their physical
spaces is crucial to ensuring the resilience and long-term sustainability of the City’s arts and
culture sector.


The City’s long standing affordability crisis due to high commercial rent and lack of regulation
remains a force behind cultural displacement. The resultant storefront vacancy epidemic has a
deleterious effect on neighborhoods that lose access to vital and affordable community services
and cultural programs. Small businesses are essential to the kind of hyperlocal tourism that can
drive the City’s economic recovery. Arts and cultural organizations drive local residents and
tourists to small businesses of all kinds, from restaurants to retail, hotels, parking, and
community services. Notably, the arts and cultural community has long been experiencing



                                                                                                    2
closures of spaces, unaffordable rent, and unpredictable leasing contracts, and continues to
identify rent, leases, and property management as the largest expenses in their budgets. While
Governor Hochul’s recent extension of the eviction moratorium in New York is helpful, this
short-term measure also increases the debt and already precarious financial situation small
budget arts and cultural organizations are facing. Relief funding initiatives have been crucial
responsive measures, but ultimately only alleviate some short-term and immediate needs.
Long-term measures are needed to shift commercial spaces to a more sustainable model that
supports tenant small businesses and arts and cultural organizations. Additionally, addressing
systemic equity in the City goes hand in hand with land and property use. Regulating commercial
rent can help combat systemic oppression, contribute to more equitable opportunities for small
business owners from historically marginalized communities, and close racial wealth gaps by
bolstering the generational longevity of small businesses.


Currently, commercial tenants are not afforded the same protections as residential tenants are
afforded by the Rent Guidelines Board, which sets the percentage that landlords can raise rents
for rent-stabilized apartments. For commercial tenants, landlords can decide to drastically
increase rent rates and property tax assessments at any time. The creation of a Commercial Rent
Guidelines Board would help small businesses plan and protect themselves from the whims of
predatory landlords by setting annual limits on rates of rent increases. The Commercial Rent
Guidelines Board would also decrease or freeze rates for small office, retail, and manufacturing
spaces and impose penalties for rent overcharges. Commercial spaces covered by commercial
rent stabilization include retail stores smaller than 10,000 square feet, manufacturing spaces
smaller than 25,000 square feet, and offices smaller than 10,000 square feet, and all commercial
tenants would be covered, so long as they lease a covered space. This ensures that landlords have
no incentive to seek out chain businesses over small businesses, since rent adjustments would be
the same either way. The Commercial Rent Guidelines Board would be composed of seven
Mayoral appointees, including financial and economic experts, commercial tenants, commercial




                                                                                                   3
landlords, and members of the public to ensure the needs and concerns of all constituents
involved are taken into account.


Many tenant organizations are unable to make rent payments to landlords that have not offered or
can no longer offer relief or flexibility. While commercial rent relief can provide immediate
reprieve, sustainable affordability remains a paramount concern for arts and culture organizations
that own and manage property as well as tenant organizations. Regulating commercial rent
would provide commercial tenants with much-needed relief during the pandemic and also ensure
the long-term survival of arts and cultural spaces by mitigating their displacement. This in turn
improves the real estate market for small businesses, arts workers, and arts and cultural
organizations as well as communities they serve.


The impact of commercial rent stabilization goes far beyond the tenants themselves. For studios
and performance venues that provide low-cost rentals to independent artists, the repercussions of
organizational displacement and closures are compounded; losing these spaces puts the working
lives of arts workers and the art itself at risk. These impacts are felt most acutely by artists and
organizations led by and primarily serving BIPOC, immigrants, disabled people, and other
communities with less access to capital reserves, which in turn stands to exacerbate historical
inequities in the field. Commercial rent stabilization is a concrete investment in both arts and
cultural organizations and individual arts workers and is desperately needed to ensure long-term
survival of our City’s arts workforce.


Implementing commercial rent relief and stabilization has a twofold benefit: 1) directly
supporting the financial viability and sustainable longevity of tenant organizations that would
otherwise risk losing their space, while 2) regulating the administrative and economic power of
landlords that lease to small businesses and arts and cultural organizations. Taken together, these
measures provide much-needed relief during the pandemic and ensure the long-term capacity of
arts and cultural spaces to serve their communities.



                                                                                                       4
Dance/NYC joins the City’s arts and culture sector in asking for commercial rent relief and rent
stabilization to ensure the longevity of small businesses and arts and cultural organizations that
have long been a part of the communities in our City. Small businesses can lead the City’s
economic recovery, and commercial rent stabilization can help ensure their resilience, growth,
and long-term survival.


For Dance/NYC and its constituents, the most urgent priorities are:


   1. The extension of commercial rent cancellation to help address the current and
       potential displacement of arts and cultural organizations and small businesses; and
   2. The establishment of a Commercial Rent Guidelines Board to set a maximum
       annual rent increase rate to help small businesses and independent arts and cultural
       spaces better plan and protect themselves from unpredictable rent raises and
       property tax assessments.


We thank you in advance for your consideration and commend the City’s ongoing efforts to
support economic recovery and cultural resilience. Now is the time to act so that small
businesses, workers, and communities continue to thrive for years to come. We look forward to
the opportunity to ensure that New York remains a vibrant capital for small businesses to grow
sustainably within their communities.


                                                ##




                                                                                                     5
