Jenny Dubnau, Artist Studio Affordability Project

I am also a commercial tenant.

The Covid economy is wreaking havoc on storefronts, restaurants, manufacturers and working artists. But
the commercial affordability crisis in New York City was already at unsustainable levels prior to the pandemic.
Each month, many small businesses are issued eviction warrants, priced out, or their leases are simply not
renewed. Commercial leases are completely unregulated, and rezonings, with their unaffordable luxury towers,
are decimating communities by causing upward pressure on both commercial and residential rents. Even
before the pandemic, empty storefronts lined our streets, and hotels and high-end tenants are replacing jobs-
producing manufacturers and working artists in our industrial zones. Make no mistake: many of these
commercial tenants are not “failed businesses:” they just can’t sustain the insane rents that landlords are
demanding. Many of our neighborhoods are left without supermarkets, beloved restaurants, or hardware
stores. Local businesses are going under at a rapid pace as gentrification spreads through all five boroughs.
These local businesses are the lifeblood of our communities: they are a stepladder to the middle class for
countless families, many of them immigrants and people of color, and provide vital jobs and services to
neighborhood residents.

The landscape of commercial renters is also a crucial arena for cultural expression. Without a doubt, the
community of working artists in NYC is at a tipping point, with virtually no affordable industrial neighborhoods
left in the city. Many working artists, dance troupes, and musicians are losing their spaces, and some are
leaving New York. But local businesses like restaurants, bodegas, dance schools and barbershops are cultural
too! Small businesses help shape and express the cultural life of immigrant and Black communities—
the streetscape is where New Yorkers really live, and we cannot allow our community cultures to be destroyed
by landlord greed. The system is completely out of balance, and cries out for regulation. New York
City’s neighborhoods are being hollowed out by hyper-gentrification, and the commercial rent crisis is a major
factor.

A crucial solution to this crisis is legislation that addresses the unsustainable rise in commercial rents,
and the Commercial Rent Regulation bill is what NYC needs, right now. I would love to see this terrific bill
passed immediately, and strengthened in four ways: 1) by adding right-to-renew protections, so businesses
can remain in place. 2) I advocate for the removal of any square footage limitations, for both manufacturing
and storefront space: there are plenty of large spaces that need protection, like dance halls, supermarkets, and
larger manufacturers. If the intent is to limit big box stores, that should be addressed with separate legislation.
3) Commercial tenants need long leases in order to sustain themselves: I would like to see 10-year leases
mandated in the bill, if requested by the tenant. 4) Improve the balance on the commercial rent guidelines
board so at least half of the 9 members are either commercial tenants, or community activists.

NYC had true commercial rent control from 1945-1963, and it survived numerous court challenges. We can do
this—pass the Commercial Rent Regulation bill!
