                          Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent
                 Intro 2299-2021, Lease Agreements Concerning Storefront Premises
                                        September 17, 2021

Introduction

Good morning. My name is Kerry McLean and I’m the Vice President of Community Development at
The Women’s Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WHEDco). I’m pleased to speak to
you today about the importance of commercial rent stabilization to businesses in the Bronx.

WHEDco is a community development organization founded on the radically simple idea that all people
deserve healthy, vibrant communities. WHEDco’s mission is to give the South Bronx access to all the
resources that create thriving neighborhoods – from sustainable, affordable homes, high-quality early
education and after-school programs, to fresh, healthy food, cultural programming, and economic
opportunity.

For over 25 years, WHEDco has served thousands of children, youth, seniors and families, including
over 500 brick-and-mortar businesses in low-to-moderate income (LMI ) neighborhoods of color in the
West and South Bronx where our affordable housing developments are located. Given our 30 years of
experience working in LMI neighborhoods of color, WHEDco takes great interest in the potential role
that Intro 1796 could have in protecting Black, Brown, and immigrant-owned small businesses, their
employees and the residents and the neighborhoods serve.

Our neighborhood work is centered primarily in Council Districts 16, and 17 in the neighborhoods of
Highbridge/Concourse, Melrose and Crotona East/Morrisania. Like the demographic composition of the
community residents where we work, most business owners in our neighborhoods and their employees
are Black, Brown, or immigrants themselves. Many of these businesses are longstanding family-
operated micro-enterprises with fewer than five employees that typically operate on thin profit margins,
putting them at risk when their expenses or revenue changes dramatically.

Over the years, and increasingly throughout the past five months, we have heard alarming accounts of
landlords imposing rent increases and pass-along fees that have overburdened many of area businesses.
We have seen businesses that, faced with rent increases of over four times their previous rent, have had
to close their doors after over a decade of operation. We have heard of businesses whose pass-along fees
have accounted for 25% of their monthly rental costs and others who are scared to enlist City-funded
legal services for fear of retribution. We worry that such continued actions could force many of the
existing small businesses that are struggling to recover from the impacts and debt caused by the COVID-
19 pandemic, to close, replacing legacy businesses where residents gather to socialize while they
exchange goods and services with chain stores. We also fear that rising rental costs will make our
neighborhoods’ commercial spaces unaffordable to would-be future entrepreneurs from our own
residents.

WHEDco supports the City Council’s attempts to mitigate these dangers through policies like
commercial rent stabilization. We implore City Council continue to analyze how this measure could be

                                                   1
implemented to ensure that LMI, immigrant and entrepreneurs of color have equitable access to
commercial spaces and economic opportunities without the fear of being priced out of our city by big
chains. WHEDco supports USBNYC’s recommendations to strengthen intro 1796 (see USBNYC
Appendix A), in particular by:

      Adding small entertainment venues and places of assembly, and all commercial spaces where
       grocery stores are permitted, to covered spaces;
      Setting initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law at the amount of rent and
       pass-alongs paid by the last tenant of record; and
      Adding a robust appeal process through which both tenants and owners can file for an
       adjustment of the rent to bring rent into line with neighborhood norms.

Please let me know if you have any questions. Thank you for your attention today and your ongoing
commitment to protecting small and local businesses, local jobs, and the economy of the Bronx and
NYC, and especially in these very critical times.




                                                    2
