                   Written Statement of
                        Khari White
  Chair of the Jamaica Branch Economic and Development
                         Committee
                      147-15 130th Ave
                           To The
                Committee On Small Business




My name is Khari White and I’m the Chair of the

NAACP Jamaica Branch Economic and Development

Committee. In this committee we identify economic

injustices which often stagnates the Economic

advancement in our local black and brown urban

communities.


In the past months of March, April and May of 2021 we

worked to find additional resources that would help

service our local small business owners who are in
dire need of funding since the beginning of the

Pandemic.


On Friday February 19, 2021, we the Jamaica Branch

Economic Committee held a meeting and discussed

some of the challenges small business owners face.


As a result of that meeting, we decided to promote

and inform local business merchants on the Pay

Check Protection Program.


As the Paycheck Protection Program neared depletion

on May 11, 2021 the Jamaica Branch NAACP

Economic Committee conducted a final community

walk promoting Paycheck Program Protection loans

to local small business owners.
As we canvased businesses throughout the area one

particular business comes to mind. A Small business

owner who managed two Organic Caribbean food

health restaurants on Merrick Blvd. (Roti Road House)

He told me he was unable to maintain both and was

forced to close one of the locations because of the

rent being too high.


This is the same sentiment that was shared

throughout the day from the mouths of many

business owners I encountered.


This one example of how unregulated rent adversely

affects our small business owners. We can’t allow

predatory landlords to increase rents forcing mom

and pop shops out of business.
Is it fair that currently many business owners whom

are slowly recovering from a year of lack luster sales

to no sales due to the Pandemic must now be

burdened with a possible increase in rent? With

unregulated rent laws small business will not be able

to survive.


In closing during the housing crisis of 2008, South

East Queen was the Epic Center of all housing fore

closures which mainly affected minorities. We can’t

allow this to happen again to our small businesses.

Small businesses are the heartbeat of our community.

They are the wheels that drive our local economy and

we must at all cost do all we can to protect them.


We need to stabilize our neighborhood businesses
please pass Intro 1796 now.
I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state
of New York that the above is true and correct.
Sincerely,


Khari White
