Testimony of Laura Wolf-Powers on
Int 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent
September 17, 2021
New York City Council Committee on Small Business (Virtual Hearing)


I am here today to testify in support of Int 1796-2019, a bill that would address
the crisis of attrition facing small, locally owned retail, commercial and industrial
businesses in New York City by establishing a long-overdue system of commercial
rent registration and regulation. I am an Associate Professor of Urban Policy and
Planning at Hunter College, part of the City University of New York. I have been
teaching and studying community & economic development at the graduate level
for two decades, and I acted as an informal consultant on Comptroller Scott
Stringer’s 2019 study of retail vacancy in the city. The views I am expressing here
are my own and not those of my employer.
Recently, I had the chance to re-watch the 2012 documentary My Brooklyn, which
chronicles the city-sponsored transformation of downtown Brooklyn’s
commercial and retail landscape during the administration of Michael Bloomberg.
I have seen this film many times before and I regularly show it to students; every
single time, it delivers a gut punch, making me sad and angry in equal parts. The
film tells the story of a community of entrepreneurs in the Fulton Mall area who
bore the consequences of decisions by policymakers and legislators to put the
interests of property owners over the stability of a thriving retail district, to put
the interests of property owners over the economic well-being of small business
proprietors who were predominantly immigrants and people of color, to put the
interests of property owners over the interests of the low and middle income
consumers who came from all over the borough because they loved and
appreciated the culture of the place and its concentration of products they
wanted to buy at prices they could afford. Downtown Brooklyn is now dominated
by generic chain retail - and riddled with vacancies. Dozens of locally owned
businesses have been displaced by high rent. Many of the small businesses that
remain are struggling and uncertain about the future. This scenario is repeated on
community retail corridors all across the city. Looking back on the City Council’s
decision to approve a fateful rezoning for downtown Brooklyn in 2005, now-
former City Councilman Charles Barron told the filmmaker bluntly, “we should
have said no.”

The bill under consideration here is a chance to say “yes” to a new system of
regulation that can stabilize the city’s small businesses and small business districts
at this crucial moment, the same way residential rent regulation stabilizes
households and neighborhoods. The small businesses that have survived the
COVID crisis of the last 18 months desperately need relief from untenable rent
costs – rents that far exceed what is necessary to maintain their properties and
deliver a reasonable return on investment to the property owner. Furthermore,
community members should not have to worry that landlords will evict the local
businesses they love and depend upon and leave their space vacant for months
and years as they warehouse real estate in anticipation of chain store tenants.

A fair and just recovery from COVID in New York City depends on stability for our
neighborhood businesses. Please pass Intro 1796 now.
