Testimony in support of Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent



To the NY City Council Small Business Committee:

I am submitting written testimony in support of Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial
Rent.

I have owned a small (micro) business in the East Village for over 6 years, and I have never had
a predictable rent pattern. I have always had to worry about the amount of my next rent increase,
whether I will be able to renew, and thus the ultimate sustainability of my business and
livelihood.

This law would prevent drastic rent increases, and the fear of such. It would provide predictable
rents, and would even the playing field between small businesses like mine and bigger chains
moving into the neighborhood. It would also reduce vacancies, which are an extra impediment to
small businesses.

Passing commercial rent regulation is now more urgent than ever. We are one of the businesses
who survived the crisis of the last 18 months (so many didn't), but we need commercial rents
stabilized for our community to fully recover from COVID.

Please see the more detailed testimony below.

Sincerely,

Maegan Hayward
Owner, East Village Vintage Collective
545 East 12th Street, New York, NY 10009



==

Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent

Intro 2299-2021, Lease Agreements Concerning Storefront Premises

September 17, 2021

NYC Needs Commercial Rent Stabilization

The rising cost of rent impacts commercial tenants across New York City. The communities that
tend to be hardest hit are communities of color and communities facing rapid gentrification.

Right now, there is no rent protection for commercial tenants outside their lease. No law prevents
a landlord from raising rent by 400%.[i]

We need commercial rent stabilization in order to curtail vacancies, to protect low-income and
immigrant New Yorkers and to preserve culture and community in our neighborhoods.

Between 2007 and 2017, the commercial vacancy rate doubled across New York City, with
many neighborhoods experiencing almost 20% vacancy rates. At the same time, retail rents rose
an average of 22% citywide, with some neighborhoods seeing more than 50% rent increases on
average. The vacant spaces you see are most likely empty because the landlord is holding out for
rent much higher than a small business can pay, and the amount they want is an astronomical
increase from the last rent a tenant paid at the same location. Many small rental buildings have
changed hands in the last two decades, moving from small landlords to larger portfolios. Small
and nonprofit landlords often charge reasonable rent increases to keep existing tenants in their
space. The larger owners can and do wait for higher paying tenants.[ii]

48% of New York City’s small businesses are run by immigrants, and roughly 26% of New
Yorkers work at a small business. When small businesses vanish, so do jobs, community spaces,
and affordable goods and services. In 2019, 77% of immigrant small business owners surveyed
in different commercial corridors stated they were overburdened by their current commercial
rent. 28% said they had to lay off workers to meet the rising rents.

If rising rents do not push out local businesses altogether, they make goods too expensive to be
affordable to the communities they serve, including low-income communities that depend on
affordable goods and services within walking distance. When storefront tenants are blindsided by
huge increases that force them to lay off workers.[iii]

Some commercial landlords have given temporary breaks on rent, but nothing prevents them
from increasing rent again at any time, leaving small businesses unable to plan for recovery. The
pandemic has not reset the market for commercial spaces,[iv] but with commercial rent
stabilization, we have an opportunity to completely re-align the power structure and give small
businesses a chance in the post-COVID world.

Commercial Rent Stabilization Helps Small Businesses Find Space and Grow

Learning from Residential Rent Stabilization: Commercial rent stabilization will protect
commercial tenants from displacement due to exorbitant rent hikes and unregulated fees. It will
provide stability for small businesses and the people who depend on them. This system builds on
generations of know-how: 2.5 million New Yorkers already have rent stabilization in their
apartments.

One Lease / One Number: Commercial rent stabilization would also ensure that pass-alongs like
taxes and utilities are included in the rent, so that businesses can clearly predict the total cost of
renting a space over time and are not hit with surprising bills that put their business at risk.

Planning for the Future: Today, small businesses have no idea how much their current space will
cost once their lease ends; many are operating in spaces where they are month-to-month because
renegotiating the rent after a lease expires comes with a huge risk of a rent hike. Many others
have closed or moved because landlords demanded high rents when leases ended.[v] Setting
guidelines on the rent ensures that small businesses can responsibly plan for the future, knowing
how much they’ll need to pay for use of the location their business needs to operate.

Level playing field: By ensuring that covered commercial spaces are regulated the same,
regardless of who is renting them, ensures a level playing field for small businesses, rather than
allowing chain businesses to out-bid them by agreeing to exorbitant rents.

Strengthening Intro 1796

Below is a summary of the improvements are crucial to improving Intro 1796:

Requiring that Mayoral appointments to the Guidelines Board be approved by the Council.

Adding small entertainment venues and places of assembly, and all commercial spaces where
grocery stores are permitted, to covered spaces.

Setting initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law at the amount of rent and
pass-alongs paid by the last tenant of record.

Adding a robust appeal process through which both tenants and owners can file for an
adjustment of the rent to bring rent into line with neighborhood norms.

Clarifying that the rent-setting agency will be a new agency, called the Commercial Rent
Guidelines board, and another agency will be designated by the Mayor for enforcement (e.g. to
oversee compliance with rent orders and handle overcharges and appeals);

Requiring landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year and
requiring the agency to send copies of registration and a complete rent history to tenants every
year.

Storefront Bill of Rights, Intro 2299

Unless rents are regulated, the below elements of the proposed Storefront Bill of Rights will not
keep our cultural and community spaces from disappearing; however, when combined with
Commercial Rent Stabilization and expanded to cover all the commercial spaces covered by
Intro 1796 (not just retail stores that sell goods), the combination of Intro 2299 and Intro 1796
will form a robust framework for stabilizing New York City’s smallest businesses, and we would
support combining them in such a way:

Requiring a written lease for any tenancy longer than 1 year; though such a requirement needs to
clarify that the lack of written lease will not be cause to terminate a tenancy and evict a tenant
who wants to stay.

Requiring landlords to use a standard vacancy lease.
Requiring commercial landlords to provide tenants with the Certificate of Occupancy, a record of
violations issued or construction done during the 10 years before they move in.

Requiring continuously updated contact information for the landlord.

Allowing commercial tenants reasonable time to cure lease violations.

Providing a process for lease renewal and an option to extend the lease for up to one year in the
event renewal negotiations fail, coupled with the rent protections in Intro 1796.

-//-

[i] See A. Randle, Is a 400% Rent Increase the Future of Coney Island? N.Y. Times (Jan. 15,
2020) https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/15/nyregion/coney-island-rent-hike.html.

[ii] NYC Planning, ASSESSING STOREFRONT VACANCY IN NYC: 24 Neighborhood Case
Studies

 (Aug. 2019), https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/planning-level/housing-
economy/assessing-storefront-vacancy-nyc.pdf (“Some owners kept spaces vacant while seeking
high rents;” “soaring rents contributed to higher vacancy”).

[iii] ANHD, The Forgotten Tenants: New York City’s Immigrant Small Business Owners
(March 6, 2019), https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-citys-immigrant-small-
business-owners (52% reported having to raise prices to make rent; 38% of businesses in
Kingsbridge, Bronx reported having to fire workers in order to make rent).

[iv] Oscar Abello, Can NYC’s Storefront Registry Help Level the Playing Field for Embattled
Commercial Tenants? (July 20, 2021), https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/can-nyc-storefront-
registry-level-the-playing-field-for-commercial-tenants (“[Real estate broker] Francisco
Gonzalez says during the pandemic he saw some vacant commercial spaces being offered at
prices he hadn’t seen since the 1990s. But they were only offering leases at those prices for one
or two years at most, anticipating they could re-raise rents to whatever they want once the
pandemic is completely over. And now, even after some commercial tenants completely folded
during the pandemic, Gonzalez says commercial landlords are already back to asking for prices
that are close to pre-pandemic levels.”); see also M. Egkolfopoulou & C. Ballentine, New York
Renters Face 70% Increases as Pandemic Discounts Expire, Bloomberg News (Sept. 15, 2021),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-15/new-york-city-rents-landlords-jack-up-
prices-70-in-lease-renewals-post-covid.

[v] Abello, above, quoting Gonzalez: “They’re under contract [to rent their space] for so many
years but once that contract expires, the rents go up and the business closes. That’s the real deal
when it comes to that.”
