testimony to support Intro 1796



My name is Natasha Amott and I am a small business owner. I am testifying in support
of Intro 1796 because I believe there has been a long developing commercial
affordability problem in NYC and we cannot rely on a pandemic to cure it.

I founded Whisk in 2008 and for 10.5 years I ran this highly successful kitchenware
brick and mortar and online retail business in the heart of Williamsburg. I had a great
relationship with my small landlord who lived above the store. But between 2010 and
through until now, Williamsburg has become more a home for multinational and private
equity backed retail stores than independents like Whisk. What used to be a
phenomenon isolated to fancy 5th Ave or Soho has been slowing moving to other
Manhattan neighborhoods and the outer boroughs and the problem is that these kinds
of businesses - the Levi’s, the Space NK Apothecaries, the G Star Raws - have the
finances to pay far more than they will earn through that one location. They accept high
rents as an advertisement cost.

But then there are businesses like Whisk where I was paying $18,500/month in the last
year of my lease. I could do that. I offered to pay $20,000/month in the renewal. But my
landlord insisted on a 44% increase for just a 5 year renewal with annual escalations of
3% to stay. That may have been “market rate” but it was damn near unaffordable and
would have required pushing my staff’s wages down to minimum wage - that’s your
sisters, your kids, your neighbors’ salaries - and increasing prices for customers - that’s
all of us.

Instead of accessing affordable cookware, local residents can now go to 231 Bedford
Avenue and pay upward of $75 for half hour oxygen pod sessions. That is what
replaced Whisk.

Let’s fast forward to this very moment. At 203 Bedford Avenue - two blocks from where
Whisk used to be - is a vacant 1700 sf space for rent. It's a perfect sized space for a
Whisk. The landlord is asking $300 sf - or $43,500/month. He said he would start a
conversation closer to $200 sf but that’s still over $29,000/month. There is no scenario
in which that location’s expected revenues will make that space affordable.

And so when data show rents coming down, I urge everyone listening here to ask - are
down rents the same as affordable rents OR, are they mostly affordable to those with
deep pockets who may not live in NYC? Because somehow we have got to take away
the competitive edge that the latter type companies have. And Intro 1796 is proposing to
do just that.

City Council members, New Yorkers don’t want to hear about constitutionality; they
don’t care about authority to enact legislation; they want a strong economy in their
neighborhood where they can access affordable and needed goods. But without
commercial rent stabilization we are losing that.
Thank you,



Natasha Amott

--

Natasha Amott | natasha@whisknyc.com | whisknyc.com

Downtown Brooklyn | 197 Atlantic Avenue (by Court St) | t.718.852.2665
