                                    September 17, 2021

                              Testimony of Nelson Eusebio
                            Director of Government Relations
                            National Supermarket Association

                                        Before the

                                  New York City Council

                               Committee on Small Business

                                        Regarding

                      Commercial Rent Regulation and Food Donation


Thank you, Chairman Miller, and the rest of the committee members, for the opportunity
to submit testimony.

My name is Nelson Eusebio and I’m the Director of Government Relations for the
National Supermarket Association (NSA). NSA is a trade association that represents the
interest of independent supermarket owners in New York and other urban cities
throughout the East coast, Mid-Atlantic region, and Florida. In the five boroughs alone,
we represent over 400 stores that employ over 15,000 New Yorkers. Our members work
hard every day to run their businesses, support their families and provide jobs and healthy
food options to their communities.

There were several bills heard as part of today’s hearing, but I would like to focus my
testimony on Intros 1796, 2299, and 0568. As we slowly recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic, it is imperative that the City take steps to ensure our small businesses can
remain in their storefront properties. In our industry, we have seen the negative impacts
of rising rents in recent years. During COVID supermarkets have contended with
increased costs for PPE and a proliferation of fruit stands popping up in front of our
stores. The supermarket industry operates on razor-thin margins to begin with and
unlevel playing fields coupled with any increase in overhead, like rent, can seriously
diminish the operation of our stores.

We believe that the protections and renewal options laid out in Intro. 2299, sponsored by
Council Member Rosenthal and Manhattan Borough President Brewer, will provide a
level of security for our members as they head into lease negotiations with their landlords
and will further prevent the increase in vacant storefronts that have populated many of the
once busy commercial corridors in the city. Furthermore, we also commend the Council
for taking action to level the playing field in the commercial rent space by proposing to
implement a commercial rent guidelines board as written in Intro 1796 sponsored by
Council Member Levin. As I previously mentioned, our members rely on predictable
costs in their overhead to responsibly forecast their financial obligations. In having a set
and established rental increase percentage, our members, particularly the smaller
operators, can avoid being shellshocked when they receive a lease renewal with a
significantly higher rent.

With regard to Intro 568, sponsored by Council Member Treyger, we support the Council
implementing policies that incentivize versus penalize businesses to participate in various
government programs and policies. Most of our stores already donate excess food but we
feel this is a positive tool to encourage those that do not. Furthermore, we encourage the
Council to examine this model of incentivizing further when considering future
legislation involving the regulation of businesses.

We look forward to working with the Council on this legislation further.

Thank you.
