            NYC ARTIST COALITION
               Testimony on: (Int. No. 1796-2019) Commercial Rent Stabilization
                   The New York City Council Committee on Small Business
                                     by NYC Artist Coalition
                                  Friday September 17th, 2021



Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today. My name is Olympia Kazi and I am a
founding member of the NYC Artist Coalition and the Music Workers Alliance. I also serve as
the vice-chair of NYC Nightlife Advisory Board.

Let’s make sure that we all understand what are the stakes at this hearing today. What we’re
discussing here isn’t a matter of dollars and cents. It’s about something much more complex
than the bottom line. It’s about life and death:

It’s the life and death of our Communities
It’s the life and death of our Neighborhoods
It’s the life and death of our Culture
Ultimately it’s about the life and death of this Great American City

Commercial rent is the number one concern of grassroots cultural and community spaces and
you’ll hear from many of them today. New York’s affordability crisis had devastated and
shuttered many beloved and long standing small businesses and nonprofits before the
pandemic. Then, COVID hit and the inequities of our city were laid bare during the pandemic.
There is no doubt that we need systemic change.

To the SBS Commissioner Doris’ and others concern on whether there be unintended
consequences, our answer is: There could be unintended consequences and we’ll deal with
them. If there are any legal conflicts, laws can and should be amended and/or repealed.

Bill Intro 1796 won’t impact good faith small landlords, it will only stop predatory landlords from
evicting beloved community spaces. Let’s protect our small businesses & nonprofits by enacting
commercial rent stabilization. They offer services, invest in communities, create jobs & keep our
neighborhoods thriving but we allow for them to be evicted overnight by unchecked rent
increases. Capping rent increases for commercial tenants who often invested for decades in our
communities is a basic protection against predatory landlords. This kind of protection is actually
the norm in France, Italy and many other global metropolises.

We cannot continue to close our eyes and ears in front of the intended consequence that
predatory landlords have already had to our neighborhoods and communities. We needed to act
decades ago, we needed to act before the pandemic. So I’m asking the Mayor, the Speaker: if
not now when?



                  NYCArtC.com       contact@nycartc.com         (347) 974 - 0860
            NYC ARTIST COALITION
The tale of the two cities will not end with more studies and won't end by eliminating red tape.
We need immediate action, so please:

Strengthen and Pass Intro 1796.

NYC Artist Coalition is also a member of United for Small Business NYC and we endorse their
recommendations for improving Intro 1796 hereby attached:

APPENDIX A

USBnyc Recommendations for How To Improve Intro 1796 to Get Strong Commercial Rent
Stabilization in NYC

Covered Properties
   ● Rewrite definition of covered commercial spaces so that it focuses on uses permitted by
      Certificate of Occupancy or lease in a particular space, as opposed to what any
      particular tenant is engaged in at any given time
   ● Add entertainment venues and places of assembly to covered spaces
   ● Add all commercial spaces where grocery stores are permitted to covered spaces
   ● Clarify that leasing where written lease is for less than year, but tenancy survives after
      written lease expires, are covered

Appointees to the Rent Guidelines Board
  ● The chair should have expertise in community development or community organizing, in
      addition to finance and economics
  ● None of the public members should be commercial landlords
  ● Mayoral appointments (and removals) should be approved by city council
  ● Add a definition of “chain business” for purposes of limiting appointee representing
      tenant perspective

Initial Rents
    ● The initial rent for an occupied space should be the rent 60 days before the law
         becomes effective (otherwise landlords will raise rents in the interim).
    ● The initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law should be set based
         on the last lease for the space prior to the law going into effect.
    ● We would like to see a robust appeal process in place: tenants and owners should have
         60 days after the notice of registration to file for an adjustment of the rent, with an
         opportunity for the other party to respond.

Operations of the Guidelines Board
  ● Add definition of “affected area:” an area defined by the board each year for the purpose
      of setting a uniform rent adjustment policy for that year. Each affected area defined shall
      be no larger than the entire City of New York, and no smaller than a community district.

                  NYCArtC.com       contact@nycartc.com        (347) 974 - 0860
        NYC ARTIST COALITION
●   Clarify that the administering agency will be a new agency established by the Mayor, the
    Commercial Rent Guidelines board.
●   Clarity that the Mayor will need to designate another agency to oversee compliance with
    the guidelines set by the board.
●   Require landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year.
    Rents should be frozen after any year where a registration is missing, false, or
    incomplete. The freeze should be lifted only when all missing registrations are filed and
    all false registrations are corrected.
●   The enforcement agency should send a complete rent history to the tenant every year.
    The history should include, if applicable, any overcharges, rent adjustments won through
    appeals or court cases, the effective date of any new and collectible rents, and any tax
    benefits or financing programs that apply to the building.
●   The board must establish, and landlords of all covered commercial spaces must use, a
    standard vacancy lease (this is also in the Storefront bill of rights bill).




              NYCArtC.com      contact@nycartc.com         (347) 974 - 0860
