               Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent
      Intro 2299-2021, Lease Agreements Concerning Storefront Premises

                                      September 17, 2021

      My name is Paula Z. Segal. I am Senior Staff Attorney in TakeRoot Justice’s Equitable
Neighborhoods practice. Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today.
        TakeRoot works with grassroots groups, neighborhood organizations and community
coalitions to help make sure that people of color, immigrants, and other low-income residents
who have built our city are not pushed out in the name of “progress.” As part of SBS’s
Commercial Lease Assistance Program, our Equitable Neighborhoods and Capacity Building
practices provide direct representation to small minority-owned businesses on commercial lease
matters, including new leases, renewals, amendments, and disputes over past-due rents.
        TakeRoot is also a member of United for Small Business NYC (USBnyc), a coalition of
organizations and community groups in NYC fighting to protect small businesses and non-
residential tenants from the threat of displacement.1 Under the threat of landlord harassment,
impending displacement, and a lack of city resources, USBnyc aims to create strong, lasting
protections for commercial tenants. We believe these goals must be implemented to protect our
city’s vibrant and integral small businesses.
Unregulated Commercial Rents Regularly Result in Rent Increases of Over 100%
       A current client of mine that is in the middle of negotiating a renewal lease – a small
family-owned restaurant that has weathered the pandemic – is being offered a lease that locks in


1
 USBnyc members are Asian American Federation, Association for Neighborhood & Housing
Development (ANHD), Bridge Street Development Corporation, Brooklyn Legal Services
Corporation A, Chhaya CDC, Cooper Square Committee, League of Independent Theater of
New York (LITNY), Legal Aid Society, NYC Artist Coalition, NYC Network of Worker
Cooperatives, Street Vendor Project, TakeRoot Justice, Volunteers of Legal Service (VOLS),
and Women’s Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WHEDCo).
a reasonable rent of $3000 for the first year, then more than doubles it to $6500 in year two, and
then adds subsequent escalations in years three through ten. My client knows that his business
will never be able to sustain a rent increase like that, though he wants to stay and continue to be a
part of the community that the restaurant has helped nurture for decades. There is no law that
requires his landlord to limit the amount of money she can demand in exchange for letting
the business stay.
        Another client – an African hair braider renting a salon in Harlem – agreed to a rent
increase from $1100 to $2800 just four months after the pandemic emergency was declared so
that she would be able to stay in the neighborhood where she had developed her business. She
had developed a stable clientele during the term of her initial five-year lease, which she had
negotiated with the family that owned the building when she decided to set up her business there;
she was hopeful that her customers would come back to her as NYC reopened, and sure that if
she moved, she would have to start building her business anew. By the time she renegotiated the
last July her landlord had sold the building to a hedge-fund-backed portfolio. When she agreed to
the new rent, she knew that she would be cutting wages, raising prices, and cutting into her own
proceeds from the business, on which her family relies for its survival.2 Again, there is no limit
to how much the new landlord was able to demand that my client pay to keep her business
in its community.
        I have seen some landlords give our clients temporary breaks on rent, but nothing
prevents them from increasing rent again at any time or writing huge jumps into leases after the
concession period expires. The concessions we have been seeing all ended last summer when the
State started providing re-opening guidelines. We are seeing rents on both new and renewal
leases that are at least as high as they were before the pandemic. The pandemic has not reset the
market for commercial spaces,3 but with commercial rent stabilization, we have an opportunity
to completely re-align the power structure and give small businesses a chance in the post-COVID
world.
Commercial Rent Stabilization, Intro 1796
        Intro 1796 will create a level playing field by establishing a Commercial Rent Guidelines
Board. Each year, after a public hearing and consideration of relevant factors, this Board would
set the maximum amount the rent on smaller commercial spaces can be increased, taking away


2
  These impacts are typical. See ANHD, The Forgotten Tenants: New York City’s Immigrant
Small Business Owners (March 6, 2019), https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-
citys-immigrant-small-business-owners (52% reported having to raise prices to make rent; 38%
of businesses in Kingsbridge, Bronx reported having to fire workers in order to make rent).
3
  See also Oscar Abello, Can NYC’s Storefront Registry Help Level the Playing Field for
Embattled Commercial Tenants? (July 20, 2021), https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/can-nyc-
storefront-registry-level-the-playing-field-for-commercial-tenants; M. Egkolfopoulou & C.
Ballentine, New York Renters Face 70% Increases as Pandemic Discounts Expire, Bloomberg
News (Sept. 15, 2021), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-15/new-york-city-
rents-landlords-jack-up-prices-70-in-lease-renewals-post-covid.
                                                                                            2 of 4
Contact: Paula Z. Segal, Senior Staff Attorney
psegal@takerootjustice.org (646) 459-3067
the incentive for landlords to kick out small businesses in favor of large chains or, worse yet,
vacancy. After this bill becomes law, tenant in smaller spaces will have one clear lease and one
clear number with which to plan their future: property taxes or other fees will need to be
incorporated in the rent instead of being included elsewhere in leases as “pass-alongs” that often
result in unwelcome surprise bills to small businesses that never negotiated over these additional
fees.

        We urge the City to use its powers under the New York State municipal home rule and its
police powers to regulate the commercial leasing market.4 In stark contrast with the regulation
and control of housing accommodations,5 there is no state statute like the Urstandt law
forbidding the City from regulating commercial leases and no current State regulation of that
area of the economy. Absent such law or regulation the City is free to act; in the current climate,
where rent escalations are forcing small businesses out daily, it is imperative that it does.
       To make the framework even stronger, we urge the Council to make changes before
enacting Intro 1796 as recommended by USBnyc, attached as Appendix A. These include:

      1. Requiring that Mayoral appointments to the Guidelines Board be approved by the
         Council.
      2. Adding small entertainment venues and places of assembly, and all commercial spaces
         where grocery stores are permitted, to covered spaces.
      3. Setting initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law at the amount of
         rent and pass-alongs paid by the last tenant of record.
      4. Adding a robust appeal process through which both tenants and owners can file for an
         adjustment of the rent to bring rent into line with neighborhood norms.
      5. Clarifying that the rent-setting agency will be a new agency, called the Commercial Rent
         Guidelines board, and another agency will be designated by the Mayor for enforcement
         (e.g. to oversee compliance with rent orders and handle overcharges and appeals);



4
  See legal memo, attached as Appendix B, laying out the City’s power to enact commercial rent
stabilization. Note that the memo was written in December 2019. Since then, federal courts have
affirmed that the City has the right to regulate landlord behavior by upholding the personal
guarantee limits that this Council created to limit landlord’s ability to collect past-due business
rents from business owners’ personal assets during the COVID-19 pandemic. See Melendez v
City of NY, Ind. 20-CV-5301 (S.D.N.Y. Nov. 25, 2020), available in full at
https://media2.mofo.com/documents/opinion-re-nyc-guaranty-law.pdf. This recent decision is
the only one in which any court addresses regulation of commercial tenancies by the City within
our present-day statutory framework.
5
    N.Y. Uncons. Laws § 8605 (sometimes referred to as “the Urstandt law”).
                                                                                               3 of 4
Contact: Paula Z. Segal, Senior Staff Attorney
psegal@takerootjustice.org (646) 459-3067
   6. Requiring landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year
      and requiring the agency to send copies of registration and a complete rent history to
      tenants every year.
Storefront Bill of Rights, Intro 2299
When combined with Commercial Rent Stabilization and expanded to cover all the commercial
spaces covered by Intro 1796 covers (not just retail stores that sell goods), the Storefront Bill of
Rights will be part of a robust framework for stabilizing New York City’s smallest businesses.
We these elements of that bill as well:
   1. Requiring a written lease for any tenancy longer than 1 year; though such a requirement
      needs to clarify that the lack of written lease will not be cause to terminate a tenancy and
      evict a tenant who wants to stay.
   2. Requiring landlords to use a standard vacancy lease.
   3. Requiring commercial landlords to provide tenants with the Certificate of Occupancy, a
      record of violations issued or construction done during the 10 years before they move in.
   4. Requiring continuously updated contact information for the landlord.
   5. Allowing commercial tenants reasonable time to cure lease violations.
   6. Providing a process for lease renewal and an option to extend the lease for up to one year
      in the event renewal negotiations fail, coupled with the rent protections in Intro 1796.




                                                                                               4 of 4
Contact: Paula Z. Segal, Senior Staff Attorney
psegal@takerootjustice.org (646) 459-3067
                                         APPENDIX A

           USBnyc Recommendations for How To Improve Intro 1796 to
               Get Strong Commercial Rent Stabilization in NYC

Covered Properties
   ● Rewrite definition of covered commercial spaces so that it focuses on uses permitted by
      Certificate of Occupancy or lease in a particular space, as opposed to what any
      particular tenant is engaged in at any given time
   ● Add entertainment venues and places of assembly to covered spaces
   ● Add all commercial spaces where grocery stores are permitted to covered spaces
   ● Clarify that leasing where written lease is for less than year, but tenancy survives after
      written lease expires, are covered

Appointees to the Rent Guidelines Board
   ● The chair should have expertise in community development or community organizing, in
      addition to finance and economics
   ● None of the public members should be commercial landlords
   ● Mayoral appointments (and removals) should be approved by city council
   ● Add a definition of “chain business” for purposes of limiting appointee representing
      tenant perspective

Initial Rents
     ● The initial rent for an occupied space should be the rent 60 days before the law becomes
         effective (otherwise landlords will raise rents in the interim).
     ● The initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law should be set based
         on the last lease for the space prior to the law going into effect.
     ● We would like to see a robust appeal process in place: tenants and owners should have
         60 days after the notice of registration to file for an adjustment of the rent, with an
         opportunity for the other party to respond.

Operations of the Guidelines Board
   ● Add definition of “affected area:” an area defined by the board each year for the purpose
       of setting a uniform rent adjustment policy for that year. Each affected area defined shall
       be no larger than the entire City of New York, and no smaller than a community district.
   ● Clarify that the administering agency will be a new agency established by the Mayor, the
       Commercial Rent Guidelines board.
   ● Clarity that the Mayor will need to designate another agency to oversee compliance with
       the guidelines set by the board.
●   Require landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year.
    Rents should be frozen after any year where a registration is missing, false, or
    incomplete. The freeze should be lifted only when all missing registrations are filed and
    all false registrations are corrected.
●   The enforcement agency should send a complete rent history to the tenant every year.
    The history should include, if applicable, any overcharges, rent adjustments won through
    appeals or court cases, the effective date of any new and collectible rents, and any tax
    benefits or financing programs that apply to the building.
●   The board must establish, and landlords of all covered commercial spaces must use, a
    standard vacancy lease (this is also in the Storefront bill of rights bill).
                                             APPENDIX B

From: Paula Z. Segal, Senior Staff Attorney, TakeRoot Justice
Date: December 3, 2019
Re:   New York City’s Authority to Regulate Rents of Commercial Spaces



                            Commercial Rent Regulation in NYC in 2019

        There is currently no City or State agency that monitors, licenses or otherwise regulates
commercial landlords or the relationship between such landlords and their current or potential
tenants. New York State regulated such relationships between 1945 and 19621 but has since
ceased. Commercial spaces are not a “housing accommodation” and thus not subject to the
complicated State system of regulation in that arena.2

        The State controls the courts, where landlord-tenant relationships at the end of a tenancy
are sometimes adjudicated in the form of holdover proceedings. N.Y. Municipal Home Rule
Law, § 11(1)(e) (McKinney 1969 & Supp. 1987) (State retains power over legislation which
applies to or affects the courts); see also Real Prop. Law § 228 (McKinney 1968 & Supp. 1987)
(codifying landlords’ rights to terminate tenancies at will); Real Prop. Law § 232-a (McKinney
1968 & Supp. 1987) (codifying landlords’ rights to terminate month-to-month tenancies); Real
Prop. Law § 229 (McKinney 1968 & Supp. 1987) (codifying recovery from holdover tenants).




1 See 1945 N.Y. Laws 3; see 20th C Associates v. Waldman, 294 NY 571 (1945) (commercial rent

regulation by the State was a valid exercise of its police powers).
2 The City is particularly not restricted by limits that the State has put on its activity in the regulation of

housing:
                 No housing accommodations presently subject to regulation and control
                 pursuant to local laws or ordinances adopted or amended under authority
                 of this subdivision shall hereafter be by local law or ordinance or by rule
                 or regulation which has not been theretofore approved by the state
                 commissioner of housing and community renewal subjected to more
                 stringent or restrictive provisions of regulation and control than those
                 presently in effect.

N.Y. Uncons. Laws § 8605 (sometimes referred to as “the Urstandt law”) (enacted July 2, 1971). Cases in
which the courts interpret this housing-specific provision are likewise irrelevant to an analysis of
commercial rent regulation, e.g. 241 E. 22nd Street v. City Rent Agency, 33 N.Y.2d 134 (1973); 210 E.
68th Street v. City Rent Agency, 76 Misc. 2d 425, (Sup. Ct. N.Y. 1973), aff’d, 34 N.Y.2d 560 (1974); as
are pre-1963 cases regarding conflicts between State and City regulation of rents for housing
accommodations, e.g. Gennis v. Milano, 135 Misc. 209 (1st Dep’t 1929).



                                                                                                                  1
                            Commercial Rent Regulation Local Law
                       Proposed by the New York City Council, Intro. 1976

        The system that this potential Local Law would establish is based on a Commercial Rent
Guidelines Board (“Board”) that will control how much rent can go up for commercial tenants in
some spaces 3 in the City of New York by setting annual rental rate adjustments that apply to both
the base rent and any additional charges.4 The Board would be established within a city agency
tasked with enforcing the law, and where complaints and tenant harassment claims would be
filed. Each owner of a commercial space would register with the agency and pay an annual fee to
support enforcement.

       The proposed legislation does not impact the rights of landlords and tenants at the end of
a tenancy. It simply creates a system of price controls.

                                           N.Y.S. Home Rule

        New York State’s basic system of local governance is set forth in Article IX of the State
Constitution.5 Adopted in 1963, a year after the expiration of commercial rent controls in the
City by the State of New York, Article IX was intended to expand and secure the powers enjoyed
by local governments. The powers of local governments to act in their own jurisdiction are meant
to be construed broadly by the courts. N.Y. Mun. Home Rule L. § 51 (providing that home rule
powers “shall be liberally construed”); N.Y. Stat. Local Gov. § 20(5) (same). Article IX
authorizes local governments to adopt local laws in a wide range of fields including the
government, protection, order, conduct, safety, health and well-being of persons or property
within the locality. N.Y. Const. art. IX, § 2(c)(ii)(10); Municipal Home Rule Law §
10(1)(ii)(a)(12); N.Y. City Charter § 28(a).6

3
  All retail stores of 10,000 square feet or less, manufacturing establishments of 25,000 square feet or less,
and professional services or other offices of 10,000 square feet or less.
4
  Initial rental rates upon which annual adjustments would henceforth be based would be set by agreement
between landlord and tenant after the implementation or the Law for vacant properties, or the most recent
agreement before implementation for those that have tenants.
5
  See generally, N.Y. State Bar Association, Report and Recommendations Concerning Constitutional
Home Rule (April 2, 2016), available at https://www.nysba.org/homerulereport/.
6
  Municipalities have expanded sovereignty when their local laws address their own “property, affairs and
government,” N.Y. Municipal Home Rule Law §10(1) (ii); see Adler v. Deegan, 251 N.Y. 467, 472
(1929). While the presently-proposed Local Law would likely be found to be part of this set of laws, there
is no need to rely on such a finding when the broader Home Rule grant easily applies. The Court of
Appeals has been clear that N.Y. Municipal Home Rule Law §10 authority can go

                further than structuring the organization and administration of town
                government … No such limitation is apparent from the plain language
                of section 10(1)(ii)(d)(3), which refers not only to ‘the property, affairs
                or government of the town’ but also to ‘other matters in relation to which
                and to the extent to which [a town] is authorized to adopt local laws by
                this section.’ Moreover, we find nothing in the Bill Jacket that compels
                such a cramped construction of the section; indeed, the Bill Jacket



                                                                                                            2
        This legal structure does not require New York State to expressly delegate or enable local
government action that is encompassed in the Home Rule grant of authority. See People v. New
York Trap Rock Corp., 57 N.Y.2d 371, 378 (1981) ("(i]t is, therefore, well settled that if a town
or other local government is otherwise authorized to legislate, it is not forbidden to do so unless
the state, expressly or impliedly, has evinced an unmistakable desire to avoid the possibility that
the local legislation will not be on all fours with that of the state").

       Home Rule addresses two basic questions: (1) can the State legislate in a way that
impacts the City? and (2) can the City legislate in a particular arena? First, the Proposed Local
Law is a City law, not a State imposition onto municipal sovereignty. New York law, since 1963,
has balanced municipal sovereignty with New York State’s interests in the welfare of its
residents while answering both of these questions.

        Second, for the purposes of analyzing whether the City can legislate in the arena of
commercial rent regulation, it is important to distinguish between the line of cases that arose out
of State legislative actions and those that arose out of the actions of municipalities and other
local governments. For example, in City of New York v. State of New York, 67 Misc.2d 513, 514
(Sup. Ct. N.Y. 1971), aff’d, 31 N.Y. 2d 804 (1972) the City of New York attempted to restrain
the State of New York from implementing Residential Vacancy Decontrol Law. No City law was
before the Court. The City hadn’t exercised its own home rule powers but was instead attempting
to assert its sovereignty to overturn a State law. The Court of Appeals affirmed this, in light of
the fact that the state had legislated in residential vacancy decontrol and therefore that the City
was clearly precluded from legislating in this arena; here, the specific legislative action was the
subject of the case.

The Proposed Local Law is Not Preempted by of In Conflict with Any State Law

      When the question is whether a City can properly enact a local law per its Constitutional
powers, courts look to specific conflict and preemption doctrines in the context of N.Y. State
Home Rule.
               A local law will be preempted either where there is a direct conflict
               with a state statute (conflict preemption) or where the legislature
               has indicated its intent to occupy the particular field (field



                  reflects a recognition, voiced as a criticism, that the legislation could
                  ‘enable drastic changes and lead to unusual innovations in local
                  government which cannot be foreseen.’
Kamhi v. Town of Yorktown, 74 N.Y.2d 423, 434 (1989). Thus, under Home Rule, courts treat local laws
designed to address specifically local conditions with deference. See e.g. Board of Elections v. Mostofi,
108 N.Y.S.3d 819, 830 (Sup. Ct. N.Y. Co. Sept. 19, 2019) (“while there are municipalities in other parts
of the state that have [limited English proficiency (“]LEP[“)] voters who would benefit from having
interpreters, given the sheer number of LEP voters in the City who need language assistance the scope of
the need for interpreter services is unique to the City, and supports this local initiative to address the
issue” (emphasis added)).



                                                                                                             3
               preemption).

Eric M. Berman, P.C. v. City of New York, 25 N.Y.3d 684, 690 (2015).

        Local laws that do not prohibit what State law expressly allows or that allow what State
law expressly prohibits are not viewed by the courts as unlawfully in conflict. See e.g. Wholesale
Laundry Bd. v. City of New York, 17 A.D.2d 327, 329 (1st Dept.), aff'd, 12 N.Y.2d 998 (1963)
(State law permitted paying workers a minimum wage; City law that raised that wage was not
lawful because it prohibited paying workers an hourly amount that State law explicitly
permitted); Chwick v. Mulvey, 81 A.D.3d 161, 169 (2d Dep’t 2010) (“without a ‘head-on
collision’ between the [State] Law and the amended ordinance, conflict preemption does not
apply;” local ordinance regulating colored guns upheld even though State Penal Law regulates
gun ownership). The Chwick court explained,

               the mere fact that the Legislature's silence appears to allow an act
               that a local law prohibits does not automatically invoke the
               preemption doctrine. ‘If this were the rule, the power of local
               governments to regulate would be illusory. Any time that the State
               law is silent on a subject, the likelihood is that a local law
               regulating that subject will prohibit something permitted elsewhere
               in the State. That is the essence of home rule.

81 A.D.3d 168-9 (quoting People v. Cook, 34 N.Y.2d 100, 109 (1974)).

        As there is no State law that explicitly regulates the rental pricing of commercial space,
the proposed Local Law does not conflict with any State law as the State (i) has no system in
place to regulate commercial rents at all and (ii) has not had one since before the codification of
Home Rule.

        Simply legislating in an area is not sufficient to occupy the field. Even where there are
some State interests, where the State’s interests are “minor” and its regulation limited, courts
have allowed local laws that supplement the State’s limited engagement in particular arenas. For
example, in Council for Owner-Occupied Housing, Inc. v. Koch, 119 Misc. 2d 241 (Sup. Ct.
N.Y. 1983), the court found that since existing State laws in the area of cooperative and
condominium conversions were primarily disclosure statutes, there was no conflict with a City
ordinance that added a new requirement that a three percent reserve fund be established in
cooperative or condominium conversions. Even where there is some State law that seems to
overlap with a local law, but the court finds that State enforcement is limited, local legislation
will survive a challenge. See e.g. Ambulance and Medical Transp. Ass'n v. City of New York, 98
Misc. 2d 537, 539 (Sup. Ct. N.Y. 1979) (more exacting City regulation of wheelchair-accessible
transportation upheld given evidence of less-than-forceful State enforcement of a parallel
provisions); see also People v. Judi, 38 N.Y.2d 529, 531 (1976) (Court of Appeals upheld a City
ordinance criminalizing possession of toy guns without intent to use unlawfully even though
State law required that possession with intent to be used unlawfully be proven); People v. Lewis,
295 N.Y. 42 (1945) (City penalties for black market activities which exceeded State penalties
were found not to create unlawful inconsistency). State laws governing the process of



                                                                                                      4
termination of tenancy will likely be found to be evidence of a minor interest in the relationship
between commercial landlords and tenants, insufficient to establish a conflict.

The proposed local law will not impact the termination-of-tenancy and holdover processes
established by State law. Thus Tartaglia v. McLaughlin, 190 Misc. 266 (Sup. Ct. Kings 1947),
aff’d 273 A.D. 821, rev’d on other grounds 297 N.Y. 419 (1948) and F.T.B. Realty Corp. v.
Goodman, 300 N.Y. 140 (1949), Haque v. Pocchia, 186 Misc.2d 806 (App. T. 2d Dep’t 2000)
and related cases are inapposite as they address an explicit limit on Home Rule power that is
written into the statute,

        The proposed local law is not an attempt to establish a regulatory agency which parallels a
State agency as there is no current State agency that controls commercial leasing. Compare People
v. Kelsey's Seafood, 112 Misc. 2d 927, 930 (Dist. Ct. Suffolk 1982) (local law that required
shellfish wholesalers to obtain local permit in addition to the permit that the State already required
found to be preempted).

         In order for a court to find that a local law is preempted by State law, there must be
evidence that the State desired to preempt the field. “A desire to pre-empt may be implied from a
declaration of State policy by the Legislature or from the fact that the Legislature has enacted a
comprehensive and detailed regulatory scheme in a particular area. Consol. Edison Co. of New
York v. Town of Red Hook, 60 N.Y.2d 99, 105 (1983) (emphasis added). See Board of Elections
v. Mostofi, 108 N.Y.S.3d at 830 (no conflict preemption for local law mandating the provision of
interpreters at polling places despite the State Election Law providing a comprehensive
regulatory scheme as no provision of the Election Law expressly governs the ability to provide
interpreter services to voters; “[t]he Election Law contains no express legislative statement of an
intent to preempt municipal action”); New York Bankers Ass'n, Inc. v. City of New York, 119
F.Supp.3d 158, 194 (S.D.N.Y. 2015) (local law regulating state-chartered banks found to be
preempted by State law where that State “evinces an intent to preempt the field of regulating
state-chartered banks” by including language in the statute creating a State regulatory agency
that it is “the policy of the state of New York that the business of all… banking organizations
shall be supervised and regulated through the” State agency which will “have broad powers of
regulation to control and police the banking institutions under their supervision” (internal
citations and quotations omitted)). Chwick, 81 A.D.3d at 170 (detailed Penal Law scheme for
firearms licensing preempts local law licensing provisions).

     Here, the State has neither made a declaration of its intention to occupy the field of
commercial leasing, nor enacted any regulatory scheme that applies to the field.

        Further, the fact that both the State and the City seek to legislate in the same area does
not alone create an inconsistency. Eric M. Berman, P.C. v. City of New York, 796 F.3d 171, 174
(2d Cir. 2015) (finding “no express conflict between the broad authority accorded to [New York
State] courts to regulate attorneys under the [New York] Judiciary Law and the [local] licensing
of individuals as attorneys who are engaged in debt collection activity falling outside of the
practice of law,” and further finding that the “authority to regulate attorney conduct does not
evince an intent to preempt the field of regulating” all services rendered by attorneys (internal
citations and quotations omitted)); see also People v. Webb, 78 Misc. 2d 253, 256 (Crim. Ct.
N.Y. 1974). The existence of State laws governing the process of termination of tenancy will not


                                                                                                     5
likely be viewed as a bar to a finding that the Local Law creating a system for commercial rent
regulation is lawful.

                                          Police Powers

       In addition to the Home Rule powers enumerated above and granted by the Constitution
and specific State statutes, municipalities have police powers.

               Legislation which has for its object the promotion of the public
               welfare and safety, falls within the scope of the police power and
               must be submitted to even though it imposes restraints and burdens
               on the individual.

People v. Ortiz, 479 NYS2d 613, 620 (2nd Dept 1984).

       The police power has been defined generally as the power to regulate persons and
property for the purpose of securing the public health, safety, welfare, comfort, peace and
prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants Village of Carthage v. Frederick, 122 N.Y. 268
(1890) (affirming village law imposing responsibilities on owners of real property in its limits).
The power is as old as is the organization of municipalities.

Price Controls are a Hallmark of Police Powers

        In People v. Cook, the Court of Appeals affirmed that police powers of a local
government give it the power to establish price controls. 34 N.Y.2d at 104 (“the leading New
York cases interpreting the police power of municipalities support the validity of municipal price
regulation in certain instances”).

        It is a “a proper exercise of the City's police power to regulate … businesses in the public
interest,” Short Stop Industrial Catering, 485 N.Y.S.2d 921, 924 (Sup. Ct. N.Y. Co 1985), and
there is no exclusion for the regulation of real estate businesses.

                Rent Regulation is not a Taking that Requires Compensation

               Every restriction upon the use of property, imposed in the exercise
               of the police power, deprives the owner of some right theretofore
               enjoyed, and is, in that sense, an abridgment by the state of rights
               in property without making compensation. But restriction imposed
               to protect the public health, safety, or morals from dangers
               threatened is not a taking .... The state merely prevents the owner
               from making a use which interferes with paramount rights of the
               public.

Tirolerland, Inc. v. Lake Placid 1980 Olympic Games, Inc., 592 F.Supp. 304 (N.D. N.Y. 1984)
(quoting Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 393, 417 (1922) (Brandeis, J., dissenting)).




                                                                                                   6
       The Supreme Court of the United States has recognized only two “relatively narrow”
categories of regulatory takings: regulatory actions (1) that permanently invade the owner’s
property, or (2) completely deprive an owner of “all economically beneficial us[e]” of the
property.” Lingle v Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 538 (2005) (quoting Lucas v S.C. Coastal
Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992)).

        Where a property retains some of its value, courts will consider whether such action
constitutes a partial taking. A government action that “merely adjust[s] the benefits and burdens
of economic life,” is not a “taking.” Penn Central Transp. Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104,
124 (1978). Denying the owner a “reasonable return” on the land does not prevent economically
viable use, and is thus not a “taking.” Rent Stabilization Ass’n v. Dinkins, 805 F. Supp. 159, 163
(S.D.N.Y. 1992) (upholding New York City’s Rent Stabilization Law). The Supreme Court “has
consistently affirmed that States have broad power to regulate [...] the landlord-tenant
relationship without paying compensation for all economic injuries that such regulation entails.”
Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan Catv Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 440 (1982). A court will not likely
find that a reduction of potential future rental income through regulation of how much rents can
be increased relative to rents at the time the Regulation law is enacted constitutes a reduction in a
property’s value. Rent increase regulation does not destroy all economically beneficial or
productive use, and thus is unlikely to be a “taking.” See Dawson v. Higgins, 610 N.Y.S.2d 200,
207 (App. Div. 1st Dept. 1994) (upholding regulatory rule permanently preventing certain
evictions from rent-controlled units).




                                                                                                   7
