My name is Peter Sullivan. I grew up in and near New York City in the 80s and 90s.
I have seen this city change and become increasingly corporate and homogenous
with time. The character is rapidly being drained from the city. There have been
decades of small, fine tuned reforms, but the trajectory moves in the same
direction. Bold, sweeping, decisive action is called for at this point.

I moved into my current neighborhood of Briarwood, Queens in 2009. There were
24 hour diners, bars and bodegas that have all disappeared. It is still a great
neighborhood for families, but it is losing its appeal as a place for single adults
like myself, who really chose to keep NYC as a home for the 24 hour convenience.
This neighborhood now has a bedtime and around the rest of the city, I see the
same thing. We are going from the city that never sleeps to the city that has
turkey dinner, then takes an Ambien and gets ten hours of sleep.

It’s funny how certain council people talk about the fear of passing costs onto
business owners. That’s EXACTLY what Intro 1796 is designed to prevent. Let’s be
clear. This legislation does not target small time mom and pop landlords. This bill
targets big, greedy real estate giants, who own well more than half of commercial
real estate in the city. These are not benevolent actors who are simply making
real estate available out of the goodness of their hearts, asking that their tenants
assume the costs of taxes. It is disingenuous to suggest that these rent increases
are calculated in proportion to increasing taxes. Property taxes HAVE NOT
generally been increasing, so this idea that gouging rent is intended to keep pace
with taxes is pure propaganda.

When the cost of doing business is getting to be too much for small business
owners and entrepreneurs, you have to look at who is becoming
disproportionately wealthy from the arrangement, because that is the money
vacuum causing the problem. The money is not evaporating into thin air; more
and more of it is going to the big commercial landlords. Why should government
intervene? For the same reason anti-trust, anti-monopoly and reasonable
regulations on Wall Street and big corporations exist. When we simply allow
laissez-faire capitalism to take hold, capitalism destroys itself. Competition
disappears. Homogeny dominates. If something is not done to disrupt this trend,
only big corporate box stores will be able to aﬀord rents in this city. We might not
be there just yet, but between the disappearance of in-person jobs in favor of
simply working from home (which has dawned on many administrative heads of
business as more cost eﬀective than renting oﬃce space), between that, and the
homogenization of commerce in NYC, where NYC is starting to resemble a strip
mall in any other part of America with a typical block consisting of a Starbucks,
Bank of America, Chipotle and a CVS, New York City is going to increasingly
become no longer worth the cost of living.
If NY becomes nothing more than one big corporate strip mall devoid of
character, then denizens might as well pay a lot less to go elsewhere to live by a
strip mall. People of means WILL start leaving. Many already are! The tax base
will shrink. Someone has to eat a loss to make this situation more equitable.
Targeting the deepest, most avaricious pockets is EXACTLY what is called for
here.

Another thought on taxes: we sorely need tax revenue at this time, as we are
seeing damaging austerity across the board. Gutting sources of tax revenue is
also something we cannot aﬀord if we would like to keep teachers in classrooms,
cops on the beat, fire houses and social services intact. That’s another topic
though. Commercial landlords who are concerned about rising taxes should look
to residential landlords who rent out rent stabilized units. They have the ability to
apply for tax relief to oﬀset any losses by renting at a decreased rate. There is no
reason to believe commercial landlords would not be able to qualify for the same
or similar credits and deductions.

Commercial rent control worked really well between the 40s and 60s. It was
revoked for the same reason regulations of all kinds usually get revoked.
Prosperity became more widespread and people lost perspective. They took
prosperity for granted, and forgot what got them there in the first place. Greed
took hold. Someone mentioned commercial rent stabilization benefitting
unsavory businesses like strip clubs and smoke shops. Well, ironically, getting rid
of commercial rent stabilization drove businesses out of Times Square, leaving
the unregulated real estate to the budding porn industry to come in and take over.
Unsavory business opportunities come with rent regulation and with rent
deregulation as well, so that’s not really a valid argument against controls.

There is no reason to believe that regulating commercial rents would impoverish
landlords or lead to more empty storefronts, as landlords wait for bids from big
corporations. These are the problems we are witnessing NOW. The former
location of BB King’s has sat empty because the landlord has refused to drop
their asking price even a cent. It is the most prime of locations. Desirable for any
big corporation, right on 42nd Street between 7th and 8th. It has been vacant for
years. What makes anyone think that these big businesses are not going to play
hardball and demand super low rates that will then remain stabilized as well and
decline renting a location if not given a low rent? Landlords will not keep stores
empty. They will learn quickly, unlike the owner of the property that was BB
King’s, that it just does not play out that way.

I would urge everyone to take a good look at the campaign contributors for those
on this council and in our state government who are most outspoken against
asking major commercial landlords to take a loss. The logic being employed here
is that we will help the little guy avoid costs by passing on the costs to the little
guy. Someone will take a loss. If it’s not the biggest profiteers, then it will
continue to be commercial tenants and by extension, the rest of us.
