          To: City Council and Chair Gjonaj
          From: Rachel Z and Omar Hakim

          Sept 17,2021

          Regarding Commercial Rent Stabilization

          Dear Committee,

          We Agree with the concept of rent commercial stabilization.
          The greed of many commercial Landlords ruined Soho's art
          community entirely.

          We now nd most neighborhoods in danger
          of completely losing their identity. Co ee shops, Galleries,
          Everyone in an artistic pursuit in NYC is in serious danger of being
          expelled after building a neighborhood buisness for 10-15-20 years.

          In 2019-21, as a smaller landlord, we have struggled to nd a
          balance in keeping our commercial tenant in business while
          they were forced to shut down due to the pandemic. After giving them
          18 months of 1/2 rent we now have to collect full rent as per their lease.
           We have no more to give or we will be unable to pay the extra loans
           we were forced to take out to survive.

          I think that 1-4 family buildings cannot sustain nor should be
           subjected to any Commercial Rent regulation as we ourselves are
          Artists who are trying to survive. This regulation would make it impossible
          to pay taxes, maintain the buildings, and does not match the mission
          of the building when we took out our loan. This regulation will decrease the
          value of our free market mixed use multi family investment.

          Owners who buy large multi family buildings are wealthier corporations
          who can a ord to be less greedy. Small landlords are stuggling this year.
          We simply cannot take on the mission midstream in our mortgages
          of dealing with the city regulating the commercial leases in small buildings
          Our residential and commerical units MUST remain unregulated IN ORDER
          FOR US to survive. Reasonable rent increases are necessary-greed is not!

          Thank You,

          Rachel Nicolazzo and Omar Hakim
fi




     ff




                                 ff




                                                    fi
From: Rachel Nicolazzo <badbunnyr@gmail.com>
Sent: Wednesday, September 15, 2021 11:59 AM
To: Gjonaj, Mark
Cc: Johnson, Reginald; Adams, Elizabeth
Subject: [EXTERNAL] FYI Re: Regarding Commercial Rent Stabilization-this law should Exclude 1, 2, 3&4
Family Buildings

Dear Chair Gjonaj and Olympia-

How are you?
I lived through this problem…our artist spaces have been devastated by the 400% rando increases and
WE build the neighborhoods and then once they are “nice” aka safe and gentrified- we get kicked out.

This is exactly why I had to beg borrow and steal to buy a building and why I am a fair landlord. But to
have a commercial restriction on a 2-3-4 multifamily devaatates our real estate value and our potential
income. It gives us zero leverage with the tenant(if they are evil) nor with the city as they raise taxes
randomly in neighborhood like Williamsburg ,Brooklyn.

The solution is:

Please please please consider leaving 2-3-4 family buildings out of this equation.
We are not in the business of affordable housing. Because I am financially raped by the music business
on a daily basis. We need a free market building to be able to save our asses when other laws are
passed randomly like raising our taxes x5… or when performance fees go down to $50…LOL-like…this
year!!

This law no matter how liberal-is inadvertently throwing us to the wolves. The big corps call us
EVERYDAY trying to squeeze us out and offer us a cheap buyout. Now they will have even more
leverage as our value and refi power will dissipate.

Due to streaming and other corporate rape of our music business-this is all we have left- and still I remain
fair…

Luv and respect you MUCHO!’nnn
Let’s talk!!

Rachel


Sent from my Bad Bunny Phone
Peace and fortune 2u,

Rachel Z Hakim
Technologist, Keyboardist, Pianist, Futurist
Ozmosys Band #EyestotheFuture
https://ozmosysband.com/
Ozmosis Media Group
The Trio of OZ
RachelZ.com
@RachelZmusic Twitter, Facebook, Instagram
@OzmosysBand Twitter, Facebook, Instagram

https://music.apple.com/us/album/room-of-ones-own-feat-rachel-z/406205560

https://music.apple.com/us/album/eyes-to-the-future-vol-1-ep/1486090905
