To Councilmen St. Jones and Levin,

   My name is Sarah Timberlake and I am the owner of Timberlake Studios, Inc., a theatrical
costume shop in the heart of the garment district of Manhattan. I am writing today to urge you to
pass Intro 1796, once again allowing legislation to stabilize commercial rent
rules, especially for small businesses.

   The health and success of my shop depends on the accessibility to work (being located IN the
theater district), being able to pay rent and pay my employees a living wage. None of this can be
accomplished if we are forced to move outside of easy access to theatres, rehearsal spaces and
the actors that occupy them. At the same time, any lease with even a 5% yearly increase (such as
mine at present) becomes unsustainable, forcing me to look again for suitable space at some
price range that will allow this business to remain viable, only to repeat the process every time a
lease expires.

  New York City is an innovative, working, manufacturing city. Each part and parcel of the
working parts is important to the health of every business, every worker, and reaches out like a
spider web with impacts on the support businesses such as the supply chain businesses and local
food service businesses . The city needs to realize small manufacturers are as important to the
mosaic of the city as the more web-based and/or social media-based businesses.

   We have proved that we NEED these particular spaces - they are absolutely crucial to our
success (look at the surviving businesses from COvid Pandemic - it is the manufacturers still
bringing workers into the city, using mass transit. The dot-com businesses have vacated many
large spaces - even those recently renovated to their specifications and are allowing their workers
to work from home - BECAUSE THEY CAN - manufacturers CANNOT). We are not just
wanting a vanity address to look good to our customer base.

  Intro 1796 would allow these communities to continue, grow and thrive.. I implore you to
give this bill your every consideration. It would really benefit so many. Thank you for your
attention..

Sarah Timberlake, Owner
Timberlake Studios, Inc
260 W 36th St., Ste 500
NY NY 10018
