Shabd Simon-Alexander
555 Lafayette Ave #3, Brooklyn NY 11205
917-945-5758 | shabd.simonalexander@gmail.com


Wednesday, September 15, 2021

Testimony in support of Commercial Rent Stabilization

My first job after college, I worked as a seamstress for an amazing wedding dress designer
who’d had her shop on the LES for decades and had so much wisdom and amazing stories to
share. I felt so lucky to be able to learn from her but also to have such a deep connection to the
NYC that I loved so much as a child and wanted to live in as an adult. After decades in the
same space, working nonstop and living hand to mouth but loving it, her landlord decided to
raise her rent from $2,500 to $25,000 a month, leaving her without a business. (That is not a
typo.) As a working class artist without a 401k, she had no way to retire - but more importantly at
65 she still felt inspired to work and didn't want to retire. But no one can make a living paying
$25,000 a month, and so she had to close her business leaving her with few avenues to sustain
her life in NYC after that.

Sadly this story isn't unique. I’ve known too many community spaces and neighbors and friends
who’ve lost their businesses, livelihoods, life’s work; communities that lost our spaces and
neighborhood souls; because NYC has no regulation to protect commercial renters like we have
for residential renters.

Commercial rent stabilization has been something people have been talking about for years but
seemed impossible, but COVID laid bare how fragile everything is and there’s finally
momentum. the public supports this. Not just commercial renters either. If we don't protect what
makes NYC great, we'll lose the ability to attract visitors, which effects the entire economy.
Business owners who own their buildings support this because if their neighborhoods are full of
vacant storefronts it ruins their business and their community as well. Customers and neighbors
and regular folk need our communities intact.

One last story, why it’s important to have spaces in our neighborhoods that are rooted in the
community where we can form bonds over time. When my mom was 4, my grandma Minnie
wanted to give her her first haircut. My mom didn’t want to get her hair cut so she ran away and
hid in the local corner store, down the block from their house in Whitestone, Queens. The
shopkeeper knew her, and knew my grandma, and called Minnie to let her know her daughter
was safe. This can’t happen when our neighborhood spaces are constantly being replaced by
new businesses who are willing to pay more; and this can’t happen with empty storefronts.

Please use this moment to do what NYC should have done decades ago and protect our
commercial renters so NYC can continue to thrive.



In community,
Shabd Simon-Alexander
