Taylor James
Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent
Committee on Small Business




Thank you for this opportunity to comment on the issue of Commercial Rent Stabilization. My
name is Taylor James, and I am staff attorney at The Legal Aid Society’s Community
Development Project, a unit that addresses some of the most urgent problems facing New York
City’s small businesses, including the threat of displacement.


The Community Development Project (CDP) provides targeted support to small business owners
and nonprofit organizations to help our clients achieve long-term success and employment,
thereby promoting economic and social stability in their communities. We provide advice on
selecting the right legal structure, writing corporate bylaws, and additional services related to
establishing and growing businesses owned by low-income individuals in our communities. The
Legal Aid Society is also a member of United for Small Business NYC (USBnyc), a coalition of
organizations and community groups in NYC fighting to protect small businesses from the threat
of displacement. USBnyc aims to create strong, lasting protections for commercial tenants.


Black and Brown-owned businesses in gentrifying areas are at risk of displacement due to high
increases in rent. When they cannot afford to renew--these neighborhoods transform, physically
and culturally. POC-owned businesses that have kept neighborhoods afloat deserve protection
and predictability when it comes to their rental cost. Currently, there is no rent protection for
commercial tenants when their lease ends. That is where the trouble usually starts for our small
business clients that need the landlord to issue a new lease.


Our client, a Washington Heights restaurant owner of 40-years, was given an eviction notice
along with seven other Latinx-owned businesses. The businesses’ owners were each given the
option of paying higher rent — for the restaurant that essentially doubled the current rate of
$5,000 a month. Our client could not afford that option. Since there is no law preventing a
landlord from doubling the rent, a long-term tenant has no protections to ensure stability. In the
process, much is lost. An eviction meant our client was not only losing their restaurant but their
life savings that were invested to open their business. They were also losing the opportunity to
provide employment for themselves, for their family and for other members of the community.
This is also a loss for the community because POC- and immigrant-owned small businesses offer
everyday goods, services and amenities that had been denied to Black and Latinx neighborhoods
during decades of commercial redlining. They provide a neighborhood’s unique character and
cultural identity, with products and services geared to the needs and desires of residents. In this
case an entire block of Latinx, including long-term business owners were displaced.
Unfortunately, our client’s rental burden was not unique, in 2019 a report identified rent burden
as the top concern for immigrant small business owners throughout New York City.1 (See ANHD,
The Forgotten Tenants: New York City’s Immigrant Small Business Owners (March 6, 2019),
https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-citys-immigrant-small-business-owners) even before
coronavirus forced them to shut down.


Commercial Rent Stabilization, Intro 1796
Intro 1796 will protect commercial tenants from displacement due to enormous rent hikes by
creating a board to set annual rent increases. The rent protections set by the board ensures that
landlords have no incentive to seek out big chain businesses over small businesses, since rent
adjustments would be the same for either tenant. This legislation will provide predictable rents for
small businesses, allowing them to maintain their livelihood. Landlords will not be able to add
additional charges because taxes, water or operating fees will be included in the rent set by the
board.


The Legal Aid Society encourages the council to pass commercial rent stabilization to ensure the
survival of small businesses, and in turn ensure the vitality and vibrancy of New York’s
neighborhoods.




1
These impacts are typical. See ANHD, The Forgotten Tenants: New York City’s Immigrant Small Business
Owners (March 6, 2019), https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-citys-immigrant-small-business-owners
