                      Intro 1796-2019, Regulation of Commercial Rent
            Intro 2299-2021, Lease Agreements Concerning Storefront Premises



                                        September 17, 2021

United for Small Business NYC (USBnyc) is a coalition of community organizations across New
York City fighting to protect New York’s small businesses and non-residential tenants from the
threat of displacement, with particular focus on owner-operated, low-income, people of color-run
businesses that serve low-income communities and communities of color. Small businesses are
cornerstones of our city and neighborhoods. Small businesses provide jobs, culturally relevant
goods and services, and community, keeping our neighborhoods thriving and vibrant places to
live. The rising cost of rents leads to displacement that impacts both long-time small businesses
across New York and burgeoning entrepreneurs. The communities that tend to be hardest hit
are communities of color and immigrant communities facing rapid gentrification.

Under the threat of landlord harassment, impending displacement, and a lack of city resources,
USBnyc aims to create strong, lasting protections for commercial tenants. We believe these
goals must be implemented to protect our city’s vibrant and integral small businesses.

NYC Needs Commercial Rent Stabilization
The rising cost of rent impacts commercial tenants across New York City. The communities that
tend to be hardest hit are communities of color and communities facing rapid gentrification.

Right now, there is no rent protection for commercial tenants outside their lease. No law
prevents a landlord from raising rent by 400%.1

We need commercial rent stabilization in order to curtail vacancies, to protect low-income and
immigrant New Yorkers and to preserve culture and community in our neighborhoods.

Between 2007 and 2017, the commercial vacancy rate doubled across New York City, with
many neighborhoods experiencing almost 20% vacancy rates. At the same time, retail rents
rose an average of 22% citywide, with some neighborhoods seeing more than 50% rent
increases on average. The vacant spaces you see are most likely empty because the landlord is
holding out for rent much higher than a small business can pay, and the amount they want is an

1
 See A. Randle, Is a 400% Rent Increase the Future of Coney Island? N.Y. Times (Jan. 15, 2020)
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/15/nyregion/coney-island-rent-hike.html.


                                                                                                 1 of 4
astronomical increase from the last rent a tenant paid at the same location. Many small rental
buildings have changed hands in the last two decades, moving from small landlords to larger
portfolios. Small and nonprofit landlords often charge reasonable rent increases to keep existing
tenants in their space. The larger owners can and do wait for higher paying tenants.2

48% of New York City’s small businesses are run by immigrants, and roughly 26% of New
Yorkers work at a small business. When small businesses vanish, so do jobs, community
spaces, and affordable goods and services. In 2019, 77% of immigrant small business owners
surveyed in different commercial corridors stated they were overburdened by their current
commercial rent. 28% said they had to lay off workers to meet the rising rents.

If rising rents do not push out local businesses altogether, they make goods too expensive to be
affordable to the communities they serve, including low-income communities that depend on
affordable goods and services within walking distance. When storefront tenants are blindsided
by huge increases that force them to lay off workers.3

Some commercial landlords have given temporary breaks on rent, but nothing prevents them
from increasing rent again at any time, leaving small businesses unable to plan for recovery.
The pandemic has not reset the market for commercial spaces,4 but with commercial rent
stabilization, we have an opportunity to completely re-align the power structure and give small
businesses a chance in the post-COVID world.




2
  NYC Planning, ASSESSING STOREFRONT VACANCY IN NYC: 24 Neighborhood Case Studies
 (Aug. 2019),
https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/planning-level/housing-economy/assessing-storefront
-vacancy-nyc.pdf (“Some owners kept spaces vacant while seeking high rents;” “soaring rents contributed
to higher vacancy”).
3
  ANHD, The Forgotten Tenants: New York City’s Immigrant Small Business Owners (March 6, 2019),
https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-citys-immigrant-small-business-owners (52% reported
having to raise prices to make rent; 38% of businesses in Kingsbridge, Bronx reported having to fire
workers in order to make rent).
4
  Oscar Abello, Can NYC’s Storefront Registry Help Level the Playing Field for Embattled Commercial
Tenants? (July 20, 2021),
https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/can-nyc-storefront-registry-level-the-playing-field-for-commercial-tenants
(“[Real estate broker] Francisco Gonzalez says during the pandemic he saw some vacant commercial
spaces being offered at prices he hadn’t seen since the 1990s. But they were only offering leases at
those prices for one or two years at most, anticipating they could re-raise rents to whatever they
want once the pandemic is completely over. And now, even after some commercial tenants completely
folded during the pandemic, Gonzalez says commercial landlords are already back to asking for prices
that are close to pre-pandemic levels.”); see also M. Egkolfopoulou & C. Ballentine, New York Renters
Face 70% Increases as Pandemic Discounts Expire, Bloomberg News (Sept. 15, 2021),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-15/new-york-city-rents-landlords-jack-up-prices-70-in-l
ease-renewals-post-covid.


                                                                                                    2 of 4
Commercial Rent Stabilization Helps Small Businesses Find Space and Grow
Learning from Residential Rent Stabilization: Commercial rent stabilization will protect
commercial tenants from displacement due to exorbitant rent hikes and unregulated fees. It will
provide stability for small businesses and the people who depend on them. This system builds
on generations of know-how: 2.5 million New Yorkers already have rent stabilization in their
apartments.

One Lease / One Number: Commercial rent stabilization would also ensure that pass-alongs
like taxes and utilities are included in the rent, so that businesses can clearly predict the total
cost of renting a space over time and are not hit with surprising bills that put their business at
risk.

Planning for the Future: Today, small businesses have no idea how much their current space will
cost once their lease ends; many are operating in spaces where they are month-to-month
because renegotiating the rent after a lease expires comes with a huge risk of a rent hike. Many
others have closed or moved because landlords demanded high rents when leases ended.5
Setting guidelines on the rent ensures that small businesses can responsibly plan for the future,
knowing how much they’ll need to pay for use of the location their business needs to operate.

Level playing field: By ensuring that covered commercial spaces are regulated the same,
regardless of who is renting them, ensures a level playing field for small businesses, rather than
allowing chain businesses to out-bid them by agreeing to exorbitant rents.

Strengthening Intro 1796
We have attached a set of recommendations about how to strengthen Intro 1796 to create the
strongest possible commercial rent stabilization framework for New York City (see Appendix A).
Below is a summary of the improvements USBnyc believes are crucial:

    1. Requiring that Mayoral appointments to the Guidelines Board be approved by the
       Council.
    2. Adding small entertainment venues and places of assembly, and all commercial spaces
       where grocery stores are permitted, to covered spaces.
    3. Setting initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law at the amount of
       rent and pass-alongs paid by the last tenant of record.
    4. Adding a robust appeal process through which both tenants and owners can file for an
       adjustment of the rent to bring rent into line with neighborhood norms.



5
  Abello, above, quoting Gonzalez: “They’re under contract [to rent their space] for so many years but
once that contract expires, the rents go up and the business closes. That’s the real deal when it comes to
that.”


                                                                                                    3 of 4
   5. Clarifying that the rent-setting agency will be a new agency, called the Commercial Rent
      Guidelines board, and another agency will be designated by the Mayor for enforcement
      (e.g. to oversee compliance with rent orders and handle overcharges and appeals);
   6. Requiring landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every
      year and requiring the agency to send copies of registration and a complete rent history
      to tenants every year.

Storefront Bill of Rights, Intro 2299
Unless rents are regulated, the below elements of the proposed Storefront Bill of Rights will not
keep our cultural and community spaces from disappearing; however, when combined with
Commercial Rent Stabilization and expanded to cover all the commercial spaces covered by
Intro 1796 (not just retail stores that sell goods), the combination of Intro 2299 and Intro 1796
will form a robust framework for stabilizing New York City’s smallest businesses, and we would
support combining them in such a way:

   1. Requiring a written lease for any tenancy longer than 1 year; though such a requirement
      needs to clarify that the lack of written lease will not be cause to terminate a tenancy and
      evict a tenant who wants to stay.
   2. Requiring landlords to use a standard vacancy lease.
   3. Requiring commercial landlords to provide tenants with the Certificate of Occupancy, a
      record of violations issued or construction done during the 10 years before they move in.
   4. Requiring continuously updated contact information for the landlord.
   5. Allowing commercial tenants reasonable time to cure lease violations.
   6. Providing a process for lease renewal and an option to extend the lease for up to one
      year in the event renewal negotiations fail, coupled with the rent protections in Intro
      1796.

                                               -//-

USBnyc members are Asian American Federation, Association for Neighborhood & Housing
Development (ANHD), Bridge Street Development Corporation, Brooklyn Legal Services
Corporation A, Chhaya CDC, Cooper Square Committee, League of Independent Theater of
New York (LITNY), Legal Aid Society, NYC Artist Coalition, NYC Network of Worker
Cooperatives, Street Vendor Project, TakeRoot Justice, Volunteers of Legal Service (VOLS),
and Women’s Housing and Economic Development Corporation (WHEDCo).




                                                                                            4 of 4
                                         APPENDIX A

           USBnyc Recommendations for How To Improve Intro 1796 to
               Get Strong Commercial Rent Stabilization in NYC

Covered Properties
   ● Rewrite definition of covered commercial spaces so that it focuses on uses permitted by
      Certificate of Occupancy or lease in a particular space, as opposed to what any
      particular tenant is engaged in at any given time
   ● Add entertainment venues and places of assembly to covered spaces
   ● Add all commercial spaces where grocery stores are permitted to covered spaces
   ● Clarify that leasing where written lease is for less than year, but tenancy survives after
      written lease expires, are covered

Appointees to the Rent Guidelines Board
   ● The chair should have expertise in community development or community organizing, in
      addition to finance and economics
   ● None of the public members should be commercial landlords
   ● Mayoral appointments (and removals) should be approved by city council
   ● Add a definition of “chain business” for purposes of limiting appointee representing
      tenant perspective

Initial Rents
     ● The initial rent for an occupied space should be the rent 60 days before the law becomes
         effective (otherwise landlords will raise rents in the interim).
     ● The initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law should be set based
         on the last lease for the space prior to the law going into effect.
     ● We would like to see a robust appeal process in place: tenants and owners should have
         60 days after the notice of registration to file for an adjustment of the rent, with an
         opportunity for the other party to respond.

Operations of the Guidelines Board
   ● Add definition of “affected area:” an area defined by the board each year for the purpose
       of setting a uniform rent adjustment policy for that year. Each affected area defined shall
       be no larger than the entire City of New York, and no smaller than a community district.
   ● Clarify that the administering agency will be a new agency established by the Mayor, the
       Commercial Rent Guidelines board.
   ● Clarity that the Mayor will need to designate another agency to oversee compliance with
       the guidelines set by the board.
●   Require landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year.
    Rents should be frozen after any year where a registration is missing, false, or
    incomplete. The freeze should be lifted only when all missing registrations are filed and
    all false registrations are corrected.
●   The enforcement agency should send a complete rent history to the tenant every year.
    The history should include, if applicable, any overcharges, rent adjustments won through
    appeals or court cases, the effective date of any new and collectible rents, and any tax
    benefits or financing programs that apply to the building.
●   The board must establish, and landlords of all covered commercial spaces must use, a
    standard vacancy lease (this is also in the Storefront bill of rights bill).
