TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF COMMERCIAL RENT STABILIZATION
WITH RECOMMENDATIONS TO UPDATE THE LEGISLATION
9/17/21
Vanessa Thill, vsthill@gmail.com (624 Myrtle Ave #1 Brooklyn NY 11205)


When a working-class neighborhood is targeted for speculative development, commercial
tenants have little protection against the inevitable onslaught of rent increases and harassment
by landlords and developers who are looking to cash in. This lack of protection allows for the
rapid dismantling of working-class neighborhoods’ social infrastructure. An entire safety net and
cultural community can be liquidated at the drop of a hat. Small businesses are more than just
storefronts. They are often part of networks of community organizations, social services,
cooperative spaces, and cultural venues. Small businesses can also provide an alternative
means of subsistence for people who face limited opportunities and discrimination in the labor
market due to immigration status, or other factors.


Over the last 13 years, I have experienced the disastrous impacts of the lack of protections first
hand. As an artist, I rent commercial studio space as part of my livelihood. Rampant speculation
has made it such that I have only been able to afford basement studio spaces over the last 9
years. As we saw with Hurricane Ida, the total unregulation of real estate is so extreme that it
literally displaces people underground, forcing people such as myself to sacrifice health and
well-being in order to afford rent.


We had Commercial Rent Control in NYC from 1945-1963 until the real estate lobby killed it.
I urge you to support Intro 1796, but I urge you to go further than what has been proposed,
knowing that landlords and developers will take advantage of any loophole you leave open.
Below are my recommendations.




Recommendations:
   -   Rent Guidelines Board appointee requirements:
           -   The chair must have 5 years of expertise in community development or
               community organizing, in addition to finance and economics.
           -   The members representing commercial tenants should not represent chain
               businesses.
       -   The public members should not be commercial landlords.
       -   Mayoral appointment and removal of board members should be subject to city
           council approval.
-   Combat inflation before rates are locked-in
       -   The initial rent for an occupied space should be the rent on the day the law is
           passed, not the day it becomes effective (otherwise landlords will raise rents in
           the interim).
       -   Since the initial rent for a vacant space is essentially at the discretion of the
           landlord, there should be a robust appeal process in place.
       -   Tenants and owners should have 60 days after the notice of initial registration to
           file for an adjustment of the rent, with an opportunity for the other party to
           respond.
-   City government must specify and oversee administration and enforcement agency
       -   Require landlords to register lease and all riders to the enforcement agency
           (failure to do so results in penalties). Treat missing registration as amended
           registration resulting in a rent freeze.
       -   The rent on the lease, the rent actually paid, and the rent in the registration
           should match or the registration should not be accepted for filing.
       -   The enforcement agency should send a complete rent history to the tenant every
           year. The rent history should include, if applicable, any overcharges, rent
           adjustments won through appeals or court cases, the effective date of any new
           and collectible rents, and any tax benefits or financing programs that apply to the
           building.
       -   Establish a standard vacancy lease format to be used by all landlords when
           applicable
       -   In case of an overcharge, the registration statements that include overcharges
           should be invalidated and the landlord must correct all fraudulent registrations.
           The lookback period for bringing overcharge complaints should be as long as
           possible, and overcharges should be met with fines and civil penalties.
       -   Rents should be frozen after any year where a registration is missing, false, or
           incomplete. The freeze should be lifted only when all missing registrations are
           filed and all false registrations are corrected.
-   Add Right to Renew & long lease options to the bill
