                                    TESTIMONY

                         Small Business Committee Hearing:
“The Importance of Commercial Rent Stabilization for Worker Cooperatives Businesses”


                                   Presented to

                New York City Council, Committee on Small Business
                              Hon. Mark Gjonaj, Chair
                            Friday, September 17, 2021


                                   Prepared By:

                                  Vanna Valdez
                             Worker-owner at Bronx Clay
                               vannavaldez@gmail.com
                                   (347) 420-0110
Good afternoon and thank you for this opportunity to testify today.

My name is Vanna Valdez. I am a resident of and small business owner in the South Bronx. I am
here to testify in support of Intro 1796.

I am part of a recently formed worker-owned cooperative called Bronx Clay. Our goal is to open
a ceramic studio in the South Bronx to provide classes and programming to our community
members, local schools, and local community centers.

We have been searching for spaces where we can establish ourselves and serve our
community. In our search we grew discouraged seeing that rents went from anywhere from
$4000 to $17,000 per month arbitrarily, for spaces around the same size, with the majority of
spaces being on the higher end of that price spectrum. It was hard to understand how small
businesses are even able to survive with such extreme prices and clear to me why so many
didn’t survive during this pandemic.

During my search I also learned that there were very little protections for small business
owners when signing leases, there is nothing to stop the landlords from doubling the rent on
you after you’ve spent thousands making improvements on the space. This is a specific concern
for me because as a ceramic studio we will have to make substantial and expensive
improvements on the space we rent, improvements that the landlord will continue to benefit
from whether we are there or not. What is there to protect me from being booted out by price
hikes and being taken advantage of?

Passing this law will ensure predictable rents for small businesses. It will mean that I won’t have
to fear my rent suddenly doubling or tripling at renewal after having spent thousands to
improve the space. I wont have to worry about being priced out because new developments
are being built nextdoor. It will mean that more small business will be able to form and thrive,
in turn allowing our neighborhoods to thrive and our communities to come back from COVID 19
even stronger than before.

Small businesses strengthen our communities and bring them to life. Lets protect them by
passing Intro 1796 now.


Thanks again.
                                                                                              9/21/21
Via: Online Testimony Submission Portal
Committee on Small Business
New York City Council
250 Broadway
New York, NY 10007


Chair Gjonaj and Members of the Committee on Small Business:


        My name is Imran Hossain and I am a Staff Attorney in the Microenterprise Project at
Volunteers of Legal Service, or VOLS, one of the three non-profit legal service providers
partnering with SBS under the Commercial Lease Assistance (CLA) Program. In that role, I
provide counsel to scores of marginalized commercial tenants in our city facing innumerable
systemic obstacles to small business ownership. Chief among these existential barriers for our
clients, before and during the pandemic, is the injustice and uneven playing field caused by
unchecked, unregulated, runaway rents based upon pure speculation that in turn harm small
business owners, employees, and residents in their communities through rampant vacancies,
evictions, and bankruptcies.
         As fellow New Yorkers, I think we can all agree that our small businesses are what make
this city special. These small businesses, almost half of which are immigrant owned, provide us
with a diversity of experiences that embody the cultural fabric of the city. Unfortunately, these
businesses are facing an existential crisis in the form of hiking commercial rent. The unreasonable
rising costs of rent tend to disproportionately impact immigrants and our communities of color,
who face the perpetually elevated threats of residential displacement.
        Exorbitant commercial rents have been a consistent problem for small businesses for over
a decade. One study has shown that in the ten years between 2007 to 2017, retail rents increased
by an average of 22%, with some neighborhoods seeing more than 50% increases in commercial
rent.1 As a result, many neighborhoods faced 20% vacancy rates for commercial spaces.2
       Often, our city’s most vulnerable population bear the brunt of an unregulated system.
About three quarters of the immigrant small business owners feel overburdened by commercial




1
  https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/planning-level/housing-economy/assessing-
storefront-vacancy-nyc.pdf
2
  Id.
      40 WORTH STREET, SUITE 820 | NEW YORK, NY 10013 | PHONE: 212-966-4400 | WWW.VOLSPROBONO.ORG
rent.3 Consequently, about one third of these business owners were forced to layoff workers in
response to the increases in commercial rent.4
       While vacancies and laid off workers are the obvious harmful effects of uncontrolled
commercial rent, there are many more subtle but equally insidious consequences. Often, in
response to rising rent, local businesses are forced to raise prices, making their goods and services
too expensive for the communities they serve and who depend on local, affordable, and culturally
relevant businesses.
         Over the past year, I have worked extensively in the New York City small business tenant
community and unfortunately, seeing the harrowing numbers regarding vacancies is not surprising
in the least. I have seen this vicious cycle play out countless times. A tenant cannot pay an increase
in commercial rent due to unforeseen circumstances, which the COVID-19 pandemic has made
painfully obvious. In my experience, these tenants are unable to afford an attorney to assist in
negotiating their leases, which leaves them powerless in the face of crisis. A landlord spends time,
energy, and money in an eviction proceeding and if the landlord is successful in the proceeding,
what are we left with? A small business owner without a space to do business, a community that
loses an institution that once provided it affordable goods and services, and a vacant storefront.
        One of my clients, an iconic bookseller in Manhattan, offering popular books for a low
price, stands to lose its business after operating in the community for decades. Another client, a
dry-cleaning business located in Midtown, cannot afford to pay its high rent given the fact that
offices have been closed for over a year. If small, independently owned restaurants, coffeeshops,
stores, and other businesses are forced to close due to increasing commercial rent, what will we be
left with? A mundane city of chain stores and big-box businesses, barren of the culture that makes
New York so special.
     Commercial Rent Stabilization offers a unique opportunity to give small businesses a chance
to thrive in the competitive New York City business environment while acknowledging landlords’
interests in deriving market-based value from their commercial real estate holdings. Instead of
landlords setting arbitrarily high commercial rent prices, Commercial Rent Stabilization allows for
all invested parties to collaborate in setting a fair price for rent under thoughtful, transparent, and
equitable guidelines. This fair rent will enable small businesses and landlords alike to make future
plans by knowing in advance that their rents can only be increased by a certain amount. These
measures will ensure small businesses are less prone to mass displacement and that we maintain
the integrity of our neighborhoods without rampant vacancies. To optimize the effect of Intro 1796,
we believe the bill needs some improvements; including:
      •    We believe that mayoral appointments to the Guidelines Board need to be approved by the
           Council.

3
    https://anhd.org/report/forgotten-tenants-new-york-citys-immigrant-small-business-owners
4
    Id.
          40 WORTH STREET, SUITE 820 | NEW YORK, NY 10013 | PHONE: 212-966-4400 | WWW.VOLSPROBONO.ORG
   •    Adding small entertainment venues and places of assembly, and all commercial spaces
        where grocery stores are permitted, to covered spaces.
   •    Setting initial rent for a space that is vacant when the bill becomes law at the amount of
        rent and pass-alongs paid by the last tenant of record.
   •    Adding a robust appeal process through which both tenants and landlords can file for an
        adjustment of the regulated rent to bring rent into line with neighborhood norms.
   •    Clarifying that the rent-setting agency will be a new agency, called the Commercial Rent
        Guidelines Board, and another agency will be designated by the Mayor for enforcement.
   •    Requiring landlords to register leases and all riders to the enforcement agency every year
        and requiring the agency to send copies of registration and a complete rent history to
        tenants every year.


    While the city has made efforts, such as enacting the eviction moratorium, to help small
businesses during the pandemic, these measures simply kick the can down the road. Generally,
small businesses still carry the liability for the rent they could not afford to pay while they were
not allowed to operate. Council has raised concerns regarding the constitutionality or general
legality of commercial rent stabilization; however, these concerns are unfounded. There is
precedent in upholding past efforts to enact similar legislation for residential and commercial
leases. Ultimately, Intro 1796 gives small businesses the opportunity to survive in the ultra-
competitive New York City market.


                                                                        Sincerely,

                                                                        Imran Hossain, Esq.




       40 WORTH STREET, SUITE 820 | NEW YORK, NY 10013 | PHONE: 212-966-4400 | WWW.VOLSPROBONO.ORG
