The Yemeni American Merchants Association (YAMA) is a grassroots nonprofit social service
organization founded in 2017. Our mission is to educate and elevate Yemeni American
merchants and their families through education, civil rights advocacy, business, and social
service support. Based in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, we seek to advance policies that support New
York City’s estimated 6,000 Yemeni American bodega owners and their families.

We applaud the primary sponsors Council Members, Mark Gjonaj, Laurie A. Cumbo, Robert E.
Cornegy, Jr., Francisco P. Moya, Farah N. Louis, Peter A. Koo, Robert F. Holden, Justin L.
Brannan, Paul A. Vallone, and Kalman Yegercing on Int. No. 2000, to ensure equitable
distribution of emergency funding by borough.

YAMA has been advocating on behalf of our members throughout the pandemic to get their fair
share of COVID-19 related emergency funding. Like many immigrant-owned small businesses,
our members cannot afford to pay a traditional accountant and costly payroll services for their
small number of employees. They manage their business in traditional ways. Accounting for
business operations is done by pen and notebook. During the pandemic, loans and subsidies
should have been available to all of our small bodega owners who are in good financial standing,
unfortunately, they weren’t.

Local immigrant businesses were disadvantaged for the sole reason that they do not meet some
of the administrative requirements that are unrelated to their standing as good business operators.
Therefore, banks and loan lenders were distributing the loans to large corporations who could
provide the required documents. This led to inequitable distribution of funding throughout New
York City. We call on the City Council to get a step further and make these funds grants, not
loans. Many of our small businesses that qualified for the pandemic loans are struggling to pay
those loans back. We ask the City Council not to burden them with more debt. Instead, call on
SBS to dispense this emergency funding as nonrepayable grants.

YAMA is proud to continue our advocacy efforts on behalf of small businesses during these
challenging times. Now more than ever, we need our partners in government to work alongside
our members to assure small businesses are given the necessary tools to keep their businesses
open and operating. We believe that Int. No. 2000 with our recommendation to make this
emergency funding as non-repayable grants is a step in the right direction.
The Yemeni American Merchants Association (YAMA) is a grassroots nonprofit social service
organization founded in 2017. Our mission is to educate and elevate Yemeni American
merchants and their families through education, civil rights advocacy, business, and social
service support. Based in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, we seek to advance policies that support New
York City’s estimated 6,000 Yemeni American bodega owners and their families.

We applaud the primary sponsors Council Members Stephen T. Levin, Vanessa L. Gibson,
Antonio Reynoso, Diana Ayala, Brad S. Lander, Margaret S. Chin, James G. Van Bramer, Daniel
Dromm, Ben Kallos, Carlos Menchaca, Carlina Rivera, Helen K. Rosenthal, Darma V. Diaz,
Deborah L. Rose, Karen Koslowitz, Alicka Ampry-Samuel, Selvena N. Brooks-Powers, Robert
E. Cornegy, Jr., Inez D. Barron, and Kevin C. Riley on Int. No.1976. The proposal would create
a board to regulate annual rent increases, decrease or freeze rates for small office, retail, and
manufacturing spaces, and create penalties for rent overcharges.

As an organization that represents thousands of Yemeni merchants across New York City, we
are proud to say we are dedicated to educating, advocating, and elevating our community. The
rising cost of rent has impacted our merchants like all immigrant-owned small businesses in New
York City as rapid gentrification continues. Many of our merchants have had to lay off workers
to meet the rising rents. Our members run bodegas that are cornerstones of their communities.
Our members’ businesses and their essential workers have continued to operate during the
pandemic to ensure community members have access to basic necessities.

Rising rents continue to push out local businesses and make goods too expensive to be affordable
to the communities they serve. We believe in the implementation of Int. No.1976 will save small
businesses, the families who are dependent on them, and the neighborhoods they operate in.

Our bodegas owners, like all small businesses, were hard hit by the COVID-19 pandemic as
designated essential businesses. Business declined with the drop in customers, leading to the
need to lay off clerks and to take out loans to stay afloat. Our members are currently facing
competing costs as they have to pay back the loans, pay their rent, manage their payroll, and
support their families. It is important to note that our merchants not only have financial
responsibilities here but also back home due to the ongoing war in Yemen.

As the city plans for reopening, we demand commercial rent regulations. NYC’s recovery from
COVID depends on stabilizing rents for the small businesses that survived the crisis of the last
18 months. The rent crisis has been a concern prior to the pandemic. Many small businesses are
still struggling financially because of the pandemic and more recently Hurricane Ida. These small
businesses urgently need commercial rent stabilization to help them recover.

YAMA is proud to continue our advocacy efforts on behalf of small businesses during these
challenging times. Now more than ever, we need our partners in government to work alongside
our members to assure small businesses are given the necessary tools to keep their businesses
open and operating. We believe Int. No.1976 is a step in the right direction.
